Msunduzi Municipality has established a municipal joint operation committee that will operate from its disaster department during the 21-day lockdown period. Municipal spokesperson Thobeka Mafumbatha said water, electricity, sanitation, disaster management, traffic management and other essential services will continue operating “as normal as possible” during this period. “The leadership and management of the municipality will also be available at all times,” Mafumbatha said Mafumbatha said all refuse collection will be done once every two weeks on the same day as is normally scheduled per area starting on Monday, March 30. Business and industrial refuse collection will be done once a week on a Wednesday. “The banking hall, located on the ground floor of the A.S. Chetty Building, will be opened from Monday to Friday with skeleton staff from 9 am until 1 pm.” Mafumbatha encouraged residents to also pay their bills at supermarkets that will be open during this period such as Shoprite, Pick n Pay, Checkers, Spar, Makro, Game, Woolworths and Boxer. Customers can also make payments into the municipality’s account as per the account details provided in the municipal statements. Prepaid electricity tokens can be purchased online from all banks using downloaded apps. Only the emergency call centre will be open during this period. All ward councillors’ offices will be closed for the full duration of the 21-day lockdown; however, all councillors will be available during this period. All public facilities such as community halls, libraries, swimming pools, art gallery and parks will be closed, with exception of cemeteries and crematoria, which will only be open to the public for the purposes of burial and cremation ceremonies. Community halls will be made available for funerals within the limit of no more than 50 per gathering. Mafumbatha said the landfill site will be closed to residents and only open for business and industrial customers between 8 am and 4 pm, Monday to Friday only. The Pietermaritzburg airport will also be closed during this period. The municipality will not be reading meters during this period. Consumers are urged to submit their readings via SMS to 083 422 1037 or 067 748 5314 or e-mail: meter.readings@msunduzi.gov.za No council meetings will take place during the lockdown. The uMngeni Municipality said refuse will be collected from 6 pm on the same day as usual from tomorrow. The refuse site will be closed to the general public. Only the municipal refuse trucks and those contracted to the municipality for refuse will be admitted. The municipality said no garden refuse will be accepted at the landfill site. 