Where are the army and police? That was the big question on Friday among residents in parts
of Edendale and Imbali who were spending their day as any other from Friday. Edendale and Imbali were a hive of activity despite the fact
that Covid-19 has already killed two South Africans while over 1 000 people
have been infected. Scores of residents queued outside the Greater Edendale Mall
on Friday morning. There were about 100 people queuing outside the mall to get
into Shoprite and Pick n Pay by 9.30 am. The shoppers ignored the calls to keep at least a metre
apart, jostling together as they waited to be allowed inside the supermarkets. While the main entrance to the mall was barricaded with
temporary fence panels to allow security personnel to stop a number of vehicles
that did not comply with the new ruling of two passengers per car, the exercise
was ditched before midday. There was no law enforcement visibility except for six
police officers who manned a road block on Moses Mabhida Road. The police officers from Plessislaer police station stopped
a number of taxis, and those that did not comply with the limit of passengers
were asked to offload before proceeding to the CBD. Taxis that were operating
after the 9 am cut-off time were directed to offload passengers and turned
back. A resident Mluleki Mhlongo said the lockdown was a “complete
fail”. “It feels like the festive season. People are out shopping
and there’s total disregard to the president’s call,” said Mhlongo. He said he was disappointed to see car washes and taverns in
Dambuza fully operational. “How do you contain the spread of the virus when
there’s such disregard? And where are the SAPS and army to enforce this? I
thought these guys were coming full force? Or are they fighting the invisible
enemy with invisible tactics?” Mhlongo said. Nobuhle Mdlalose, a local nurse who was at the Greater
Edendale Mall Pick n Pay in full protective gear, said it was disappointing to
see residents failing to use their common sense. “The SANDF and police do not have the manpower to cover all
parts of South Africa at once. They’re not going to babysit anyone. People just
have to be responsible and stay at home.” “People need to understand that it can’t be business as
usual when people are dying across the world. We are putting our lives at
risk.” Social media was also awash with videos and pictures of
people going about their business and not staying at home as President Cyril
Ramaphosa had ordered.