Having successfully achieved the big milestone of 40 Dusi Canoe Marathon finishes, Pietermaritzburg’s Andrew Hawarden is still going strong and aiming for more. The 71-year-old Hawarden achieved the milestone on Saturday when he reached the finish line of the 69th edition of Dusi race at the Blue Lagoon in Durban. The three-day race started in Pietermaritzburg on Thursday, with Andy Birkett and Khumbulani Nzimande winning the men’s event while Tamika and Bianca Haw won the women’s competition. The win was extra special for Tamika as she is getting married to fellow paddler Owen Gandar of Maritzburg in two weeks’ time in Underberg. Gandar and Murray Starr finished seventh in the men’s race. But it was also a special day for Hawarden as he got his 40th medal, a feat that a few have managed to achieve, and the Maritzburg College old boy is already thinking about his 50th Dusi. “It was really, really nice and all I wanted to do was to finish my race and get my 40th Dusi and I’m very, very happy I did that,” said Hawarden. “My history goes back to 1966 in Pietermaritzburg when I first started doing Dusi. I was born and brought up in Pietermaritzburg, I lived on the Dusi so it’s special for me to have done 40 Dusis and I will be back next year to do it again.   Andrew Hawarden (71) finished his 40th Dusi in Durban yesterday, and is hoping to get his 50th medal next year.  “I think to do the Dusi when you are 80 years old is a nice round figure, that means I’ve got another nine years to do and when I get to 80, I will reassess the situation. I will probably push through to 85 or 90 years old.” Another Dusi legend, Lyle Wheeler, also got his 50th Dusi medal on Saturday and Hawarden paid tribute to him. “Lyle Wheeler has the most Dusis, he just completed his 50th. He is the ‘mnumzane’ [main man] of the Dusi,” said Hawarden. The Haw sisters were thrilled with their victory and Tamika said she can now focus on planning her wedding in two weeks. “Now I can get on with the planning of the wedding. We’ve been together for eight years and I can’t wait,” said Tamika. “It still hasn’t quite sunk in yet that we have won. We wanted to win the race, but we wanted to enjoy it, and we did,” said Bianca. Nzimande’s win has not only brought excitement to him but to his family who were against him being involved in the sport. “When he started paddling, I was very worried. In fact, I wasn’t happy with him getting into the sport because in the river when he used to practise there were crocodiles,” said Nzimande’s mother Zanele. “Now he has brought us so much happiness in the family. I’m really happy.” Kirsten Landman, the first African female Dakar Rally finisher, said she thoroughly enjoyed her first Dusi race with partner Chris Harburn. “It was an amazing experience, from the training to the race itself. Day 1 was great with no problems, at all,” the Durbanite said on Sunday.  Gold medal winners Andy Birkett and Khumbulani Nzimande with Durban Mayor Mxolisi Kaunda.  “On Day 2, nine kilometres in we damaged our boat. We lost 30 minutes fixing it, but we managed to get to the finish line after having to patch it up on the way, losing more time. “At the finish we then fixed our boat properly for the next day. “Chris was an incredible driver of the boat. Day 3 started out wet and cold, but ended up being a beautiful day for paddling.” While it was a great day for others, that was not the case for former Dusi champion Ant Stott after an attempt at a comeback after a four-year hiatus in the race was not successful. Paddling with Carl Folscher, Stott finished fifth in the men’s main race. “I think the other boats were faster than us. We raced well over the three days and there were no mistakes. “I suppose we must be thankful that everything went well but fifth isn’t something we were hoping for. We were aiming to be up there with the leaders,” said Stott. “We will see about next year, but I’m getting old now.” 