The three men detained in connection with a bloody taxi war in Esigodini were served with an indictment detailing 13 charges on Thursday. The men appeared in the Pietermaritzburg Magistrate's Court ahead of the 21-day lockdown to combat the spread of Covid-19. The charges in the indictment served on them by state advocate Rene Padayachee include murder, attempted murder, robbery with aggravating circumstances, house breaking with intent to rob, malicious injury to property and unlawful possession of firearm and ammunition. The crimes were committed between August 24 and 25, 2019. The trio, Sipho Wiseman Shange (43), Sthembiso Michael Zondi (41) and Siphosihle Ntombela Gasa (27), all from Emgodini, were ordered to appear in the Pietermaritzburg high court on April 30. The state alleges in its indictment that Shange, who had an association with the Esigodini Taxi Association, decided that he was going to kill members of the rival Edendale Taxi Association. It says he did this with the help of Zondi and Gasa. The two taxi associations were operating in the Emgodini area, however, the Esigodini Taxi Association, to which Shange belonged, did not have a permit. The state alleges that on August 24 the three armed men went on a shooting spree, killing six people and leaving three others injured. In the first incident, the three allegedly entered Dinangwe General Dealer and started shooting at the patrons. Three people, Thamsanqa Shange, Thabani Gumede and Nobuhle Zondi, were all shot dead, while a fourth person miraculously survived. Zondi was shot under the table in a storeroom as she was trying to hide. The assailants took R800 from the till and fled. The armed men then went to another homestead in the area where Mzwakhe Mdlalose was shot dead. The men then went to another household in the area where they shot and killed Yolanda Mzekendaba. Another person who was in the house with Mzekendaba at the time managed to flee from the assailants after being shot in the left knee. On October 24, the state alleges, Shange fired shots at a taxi driver in Emgodini, however, he missed him, damaging the minibus taxi he was driving. Following the murders, former KZN MEC for Transport, Community Safety and Liaison, Mxolisi Kaunda, visited the area where he met with police management and they came up with plans to safeguard the area. Kaunda said at the time that part of the plans the department had developed with the police included intensifying efforts to search for the three men.