While the Covid-19 alarm is sending hand sanitisers flying off the shelves, many people have taken to social networks to warn the public about fake hand sanitisers and have shared ways of testing the authenticity of your sanitiser, like setting it on fire. In one video making rounds on social networks, a man claims that he was duped into purchasing a fake five-litre bottle of hand sanitiser for R165. He goes on to do an “experiment” by pouring the fake sanitiser onto a table surface and setting it on fire. He compares the “fake” sanitiser with authentic sanitisers, claiming that if the sanitiser is fake, it does not catch fire. Nathalie Leblond, the category manager at Rentokil Initial — a company that manufactures hand sanitisers, explained that hand sanitiser is a fluid, which is generally composed of about 60% ethyl alcohol by volume and comes in two primary forms, liquid and gel. She said to examine the general flammability characteristics of alcohol-based hand sanitisers, a series of small-scale tests were performed at the William J. Hughes Technical Center by the Fire Safety Team. Both gel and liquid hand sanitisers were examined. As expected, tests have shown that hand sanitiser is flammable, due to the alcohol content, and can easily be ignited with a common lighter. “The WHO guidelines for good hand hygiene include the recommendation of using a hand sanitiser with a minimum of 60% alcohol. “I’m going to have to therefore assume that people are ‘testing’ their sanitiser to establish whether or not it has alcohol in it, due to the flammability of alcohol,” she said. Leblond urged the public to be sensible in these uncertain times, and not to fall for quasi-scientific suggestions for getting rid of Covid-19 or testing your hand sanitiser at home by setting it alight. “Some of these suggestions are not only ridiculous, but downright dangerous. Setting anything alight is dangerous. “Hand sanitiser is expensive. Rather than setting it on fire and run the risk of serious injury to yourself, your family and your home, not to mention the waste of money, rather just buy a reputable product from a reputable supplier, and read the ingredients list on the back. “If you are being sold something that doesn’t have a list of ingredients, rather don’t buy it than try to set it alight to establish its authenticity. “We urge the public to remember that hand hygiene does not lie with sanitisers alone. “Good hand hygiene practices include washing hands properly — and regularly — with soap and water, drying properly, and then using a hand sanitiser as well, or in times when soap and water are not available,” she said. Leblond added that Rentokil-Initial has seen a massive increase in the demand for both personal hand sanitiser and bulk sanitiser refills, as well as their corporate clients increasing the number of hand sanitation stations they have around their offices. “We are doing our absolute best to keep up with the huge increase in demand and ensure we provide our customers with sound hygiene advice,” she said.