A Pietermaritzburg policewoman allegedly killed her fiancé
after shooting him once before turning the gun on herself following a heated
argument in Sweetwaters, KwaNxamalala area, in the early hours of Friday. Colonel Thembeka Mbele, KZN police spokesperson, said the
circumstances surrounding the murder of Sandile Gabuza (30) and an inquest
related to Constable Nelisiwe Ngubane (23) shooting herself were being
investigated. Gabuza died at the scene, while Ngubane was declared dead on
arrival at the Edendale Hospital. It is believed that the couple, who got
formally engaged in an Umbeso traditional ceremony last year, had one child
together. A close family friend, who asked to remain unnamed and was
one of the first people to arrive at the scene, said the incident was painful
to the families. “No one saw this coming. They just made their relationship
official. They seemed happy and I personally looked up to them. “If they had problems, they were hiding them. From a
distance one would view the couple as loving, but it seems they had problems of
their own,” the friend said. He said the shooting incident happened just after midnight
at Gabuza’s homestead where they were sharing an outside building, separate
from the main house. “We received a panicked call from Sandile’s brother, who
said he had been woken by the sound of gunshots coming from the outside
building. He said he was too afraid to go out and see what had happened.” The man said when they arrived at the house, they were
greeted by Gabuza’s body, which had a gunshot wound in the upper body. A few
metres away lay Ngubane’s body with a gunshot wound to the head. “She still had a pulse. There was a lot of blood. She was
bleeding profusely; I took off my T-shirt and tried to stop the bleeding.” Ngubane was rushed to Edendale Hospital, however, she died
on arrival. It is believed that the couple had an argument and that
Gabuza had been going to the main house when he was shot. Police said a
state-issued service pistol, believed to have been used in the alleged
murder-suicide, was found at the scene. “They fought inside their house and when Sandile walked out,
we think that Neli followed him and shot him and then herself.” Gabuza was employed as a taxi driver in the Sweetwaters
area. “We can speculate but we will never really know what happened. They are
both dead now and we won’t get any answers.” Last year, Gun Free South Africa and the SA Policing Union
(Sapu) called for psychological support and consultation to address police
problems. The high rate of officers killing family members and then
committing suicide was shocking and an investigation was needed to address the
problem, Sapu said.