Two Hilton baristas were robbed at knife-point on Saturday afternoon by two men pretending to be police officers. The baristas, who work at a local coffee shop, had finished their shifts, and were walking on Hilton Avenue, towards the N3 off-ramp to get a taxi when they were stopped by two men driving a blue Opel Corsa. The men identified themselves as police officers and showed the baristas an SAPS badge. “They wanted to know if we knew anything about a murder they were investigating in the area and we said we didn’t. They then asked us where we were going and offered us a lift. “We took the lift as it was quiet and there was no public transport. We figured we were safe as they had identified themselves as policemen,” said Jabulani Ngubane, who was travelling to Howick. The men then dropped off his colleague Phiwe Dlamini near the N3 off-ramp to Pietermaritzburg and headed off in the direction of Howick with Ngubane. Shortly before the Cedara off-ramp, Ngubane said the driver stopped the vehicle. “They just stopped the car after asking me questions about a murder. I kept telling them I didn’t know anything about it. “They spoke to each other saying that they have been working all night long to crack this case and I was giving them attitude. “They then both pulled me out of the car. Suddenly one of the men pulled out a knife and held it to my neck. “He demanded I hand over my belongings to him. I gave him my watch, ATM card and pin, as well as my girlfriend’s cellphone that I was using,” said Ngubane. The men then “ruffled him up” and left him stranded on the road. Ngubane was assisted by Magma Security guards on patrol who took him to the Hilton police station, where Ngubane says, they refused to open a case. They asked me if I had any details or description of the men, and a vehicle registration plate number. When I told them I didn’t — as the car had no number plate — they said there was nothing to do or investigate and refused to open a case,” said Ngubane. He left the police station with the security guards to check on his colleague. As he did not have his cellphone to call him, they decided to go to his house in Hilton. Dlamini arrived just as they were about to leave. “He came running up to us to tell us that he had just been robbed by those same guys,” said Ngubane. Dlamini said it had been 15 minutes after he had been dropped off to get a taxi, when the blue car returned to where he was waiting to catch a taxi. “They just pulled over onto the side of the road, got out, pulled out knives and pushed me into the car. The one guy remained in the back seat with me. “He put the knife to my chest, near my heart, and demanded my belongings, which I had to give to him as there was nothing I could do,” said Dlamini. He said the men proceeded on the N3 towards Pietermaritzburg and eventually hastily dropped him off near Sanctuary Road. “They took my ATM card and I gave them the correct pin, my cellphone and my online banking details, which they later used to withdraw a large sum of money; and to buy things from a supermarket and clothing store near Brookside Mall,” said Dlamini. He said he eventually made his way back to Hilton and together with Dlamini went to the police station with their employer where a case was reluctantly opened. Police spokesperson sergeant Mthokozisi Ngobese said they had no record of the incident and encouraged the men to report it. “We urge them to lodge a complaint against the police officers who refused to help them so it can be dealt with through our internal processes,” he said.