The Pietermaritzburg and District Council for the Aged
(Padca) is restricting visitors to its frail care facilities, care homes and
retirement villages to safeguard the health of residents. Trevor Clowes, chief executive officer of Padca, told
Weekend Witness that in light of the Covid-19 pandemic and the risk the virus
posed to older people, they had sent out information to residents and their
families to reassure them that they were taking all feasible measures to
prevent the spread of the virus. He added: “Until April we have restricted access to all
visitors, only allowing access to visitors for the following reasons: to visit
a resident who is living with a life-limiting illness; because of the imminent
death of a family member; and when a family member is vital to the continued
well-being of a resident. “In these instances the visitor must answer a questionnaire
at the gate, which will assess the risk the visitor possess to our residents. “Those who enter have their hands sprayed with sanitiser and
are made aware of the heightened requirements pertaining to personal hygiene,
such as handwashing and cough etiquette and are given information on
preventative measures. “Where possible they meet in the garden or away from the
communal areas.” Clowes said they were also encouraging residents living
independently to limit their social contacts and to stay home as much as
possible. Where residents have returned from visiting overseas, they
have to self-quarantine for 14 days. “Much of our work at the moment is in terms of calming
people down and giving them information from credible sources,” Clowes said. They are also trying to mitigate the effects of
self-isolation on their residents, who are being discouraged from taking part
in stimulating group activities and physical exercise for now. The latter is especially worrying as the elderly lose muscle
mass and with it their independence if they do not exercise and maintain their
levels of functionality. At the Amberglen retirement estate in Howick, which has 430
homes and a frailcare facility, steps are also being taken to protect residents
living in an age-vulnerable area. At the entrance to the village they are screening visitors,
staff and contractors for normal body temperature using an infrared
thermometer. “We are also sanitising everyone’s hands before entry,” said
general manager, Yvette Schoeman. Amberglen has also made the decision to deliver meals from
the dining room and cafe directly to each cottage and has temporarily suspended
all activities, meetings and groups. Access to its heated pool has also been
cancelled and sanitisers are being distributed in common areas. Asked what Amberglen was doing to help residents to keep
their spirits up, Schoeman said they are keeping communication flowing via
e-mail, printed media to post boxes and via their helpdesk, which logs faults
and requests and fields all questions residents might have. “We are encouraging cottage residents to complete all
outstanding filing, photo books, creating memoirs for the children and
grandchildren. “We have created new pathways to enjoy walking the dogs or
just enjoying nature and searching for elusive wildlife that frequent our
village. Activities such as fishing, sailing model boats on the dam, bird
watching from the bird hide is encouraged.” Suvira Hariram, manager of Pafta (Pietermaritzburg
Association for the Aged), said they had taken the difficult decision to close
its popular social centre untl after the Easter holidays. “Many of the elderly are very reliant on the centre. Some
come here every day because they have no where else to go,” she added. “We weren’t happy about closing, but felt it was the right
thing to do because it only takes one person to get the virus and it will
spread quickly. We sometimes have more than 100 people at the centre,” said
Hariram.