Taxi drivers say they cannot afford to leave empty seats in their taxis despite the risks posed by Covid-19. When The Witness visited the CBD on Thursday it was found that social distancing definitely wasn’t the order of the day, and commuters were seen filling up taxis to capacity. A taxi driver at Market Square taxi rank said leaving empty seats in the taxis was not an economically viable solution to the issue. “A taxi doesn’t leave the rank unless all the seats are occupied ... We can’t afford to lose money,” said Malombe Ndawonde. The World Health Organisation (WHO) has said social distancing can limit the spread of Covid-19. During his national address on Sunday, President Cyril Ramaphosa discouraged all non-essential domestic travel which included taxis and buses. He said should you need to be in a public space you should make sure that you maintain at least a metre of space between you and those around you — but currently it appears this is not being implemented in public transport. On Thursday, a taxi conductor who operates around Grey’s Hospital, Zothani Zondi, said he fears for his health because he spends a lot of time in a vehicle transporting sick people to and from the hospital. “I have seen someone coughing a lot going to the hospital. “That same person took the taxi again in the afternoon, this time wearing a face mask,” said Zondi. Zondi said such incidents motivate him to thoroughly scrub his vehicles as often as he can throughout the day using Sunlight liquid, petrol (to kill germs and remove stains), and “Wash & Wax” car shampoo. Zondi added that for his safety, he washes his hands regularly and avoids touching his face. Passengers that were waiting to get into a taxi expressed their gratitude as a driver sprayed their hands with sanitisers. Ntombi Kheswa said such measures eased her anxiety, and said she wished this was a norm regardless of the virus. “Everyone knows how dirty money is. I think hand sanitiser should be a permanent part of the taxi experience,” said Kheswa. Another commuter echoed Kheswa’s sentiments. Zoleka Ntuli said having to use public transport during these times scared her, but she had no choice because she had to get to work. She said measures were in place at her work to protect her, but her anxiety peaked every morning and afternoon when travelling to and from work. “Sanitisers are a good initiative. Now I wish people who love the window seat would open the windows and let the fresh air circulate. “A few hairs out of place are worth your good health,” chuckled Ntuli. A rank manager, Siphamandla Ncalane, yesterday said the hand sanitisers that were seen belonged to the drivers. “Some drivers can’t afford to buy sanitiser to give their passengers throughout the day, so they buy enough to protect themselves. “It’s unfortunate but it is our reality,” said Ncalane. Meanwhile yesterday afternoon, the KwaZulu-Natal Department of Health met with representatives from the South African National Taxi Council to discuss ways to make hand sanitisers available to all drivers and raise awareness in all taxi ranks about Covid-19. It was agreed that some of Santaco’s more than 50 000 minibus taxis would be branded with messages outlining everything there is to know about the pandemic, such as what the symptoms are, what should be done should you show symptoms, and what could be done to prevent the disease. Provincial chairperson of Santaco, Bhoyi Zondi, said there are more than 50 000 vehicles under Santaco in KZN, transporting at least 14 million people every day. “That is why government saw it fit to contact us. “We will go to every taxi rank in KZN to create awareness and dispense hand sanitisers, working hand in hand with the government,” said Zondi.