More than 31 people who allegedly contravened the lockdown rules and regulations arrived at the Pietermaritzburg Magistrate’s Court on Monday and were told to go back home. Some had been issued with summonses while others were granted bail or released on warning at local police stations. While they were all told to be at court on Monday, a court official said that during the 21-day lockdown, a person can’t be told to come to court. There were also people who were arrested and detained over the weekend. When the dockets arrived at court, some matters were not enrolled, while some of the law breakers were granted bail or released on warning. It could not be established on Monday exactly how many people appeared in court because the figures were not available. DPP spokesperson Natasha Kara said she could not release any figures. However, she said that Chinese national Ming Lai He appeared in the Durban Magistrate’s Court yesterday and was granted R20 000 bail. He was arrested after 14 workers were found locked in his factory from last Monday, making masks. The man faces charges of forced labour for contravening a section of the Basic Conditions of Employment Act, failure to maintain a safe working environment for contravening the Occupational Health and Safety Act and failing to lock down a non-essential business — as his business was listed as a fragrance company. He has been prohibited from manufacturing any essential goods or providing any essential services unless he complies with legislative specifications. The matter was adjourned to June for further investigations. In the Western Cape and Gauteng, hundreds of people have been arrested for flouting lockdown regulations. In Gauteng, police have arrested 281 people since Sunday for breaking lockdown regulations, provincial police commissioner Lieutenant-General Elias Mawela said. Mawela said on Talk Radio 702, “Most of those ... we have arrested are those people who do not want to stay in their residences. They gather… along the street, they drink liquor. They just continue as if life is normal.” He added that communities do understand the message of the lockdown as some residents were notifying police of transgressions. The Ladysmith Herald reports that 48 people between the ages of 19 and 50 appeared in the Ladysmith Magistrate’s Court yesterday for contravening the lockdown regulations. Two pleaded guilty and were given a R1 000 fine or two months’ imprisonment. A 19-year-old woman told the court that she was on her way to a friend’s house to have her hair braided when she was arrested. The magistrate said, “You are at an age that knows the difference between right and wrong, and leaving your home under these strict conditions is uncalled for, as Covid-19 has been declared a global pandemic, so I sentence you to two months’ imprisonment or a R1 000 fine”. Another man told the court he has a permit to drive around town and was on his way to draw money, when police pulled him over. He and the others who appeared in court all got R1 200 bail. At Estcourt, police arrested 25 people locked inside a tavern consuming alcohol, and confiscated 47 crates of liquor. They were all fined R1 000 each.