Plans to have uMgungundlovu District municipal manager Ray Ngcobo suspended, over allegations that he interfered with a Special Investigative Unit (SIU) probe looking into claims of widespread corruption at the council, have hit a snag. This, as ANC councillors resolved during Monday’s full council meeting that the municipality should seek legal advice on how to proceed with regard to the SIU matter, including the allegations against Ngcobo. The ANC’s resolution was at odds with that of the DA, whose councillors wanted Ngcobo suspended for allegedly interfering with the SIU probe by intimidating a council employee reported to have been co-opera­ting with the SIU investigation. According to reliable sources, Ngcobo denied the allegations levelled against him in a statement tabled at Monday’s full council meeting at the uMgungundlovu Council Chamber. There had also been doubts on whether the SIU had powers to call for a go­vernment employee to be placed on leave even before its probe had been concluded. In a previous meeting, opposition parties called for Ngcobo’s suspension but ANC councillors insisted that he be given an opportunity to respond to the allegations against him before any decision was made. “Given that there isn’t a shred of evidence brought before council supporting claims that any employee was ever intimidated, council can’t be expected to endorse the proposal that the MM [municipal manager] should be suspended,” the source said. Alleged corruption in the procurement of services during the municipality’s Mandela Marathon and council’s spending on an event attended by former president Jacob Zuma in Impendle in 2017 are some of the issues the SIU is investigating at the council. An ANC councillor, who spoke to The Witness on condition of anonymity, said Ngcobo, who was appointed at the end of 2017, was not even there when most of the transgressions being probed by the SIU happened. “If you look at what the SIU is looking into, there is nothing directly implicating the MM. “I’m not saying the MM has a clean track record but what I’m saying is that there are certain people within the ANC who want him removed at all costs so that their associates could score lucrative tenders at the municipality. “These ANC councillors have delibe­rately distorted the SIU’s correspondence to the municipality in order to get the MM removed. “All we are asking for is to be given compelling reasons that could support the decision to suspend the MM. As things stand, there has been nothing forthcoming,” the source said. A former Msunduzi general manager, Ngcobo is rumoured to have a strained relationship with mayor Thobekile Maphumulo. 