A 63-year-old woman has had sleepless nights since she had a gun pointed at her during a hijacking at the South African National Council on Alcoholism and Drug Dependence (Sanca) offices. Staff members at the offices are also fearful as they say this was the third time their offices had been targeted since January. The hijack incident victim, who has worked for Sanca for 12 years, was visibly shaken when she told The Witness about her traumatic experience last Friday. She said she and male colleague, who was driving, were en route to the bank with money when a man came from nowhere, leaned in through the driver’s window and pointed a gun at her face. She said he did this while blocking the driver from moving using his arm. The woman was in the passenger seat. “We had just reversed out of the gate and stopped to fasten our seatbelts,” she said. The assailant kept on repeating: “Give me the money”. The woman said at first she didn’t realise what was happening and was in a complete daze. When it finally clicked that it was a robbery, she threw the money bag onto the back seat, undid her seat belt and fled from the vehicle. “I ran back into the parking lot and screamed for help,” she said. The woman said her colleague was pulled out of the driver’s seat and tossed aggressively from the vehicle. She said the gunman then grabbed the car keys and sped away with the money and the car. “Seeing my colleague lying in the driveway pained me. He was in total shock,” said the woman. She added that she has had trouble sleeping since the incident and is scared whenever she is in public. She said she will never wear the hat she wore that day because she fears being recognised by the culprit. “What if he sees me in town and tries his luck with me again. I am so scared,” said the woman. Sanca director Ntombifuthi Ntshangase told The Witness that she was in the parking lot at the time of the hijacking and heard screaming coming from outside the gate. She ran towards the commotion and was met by someone pointing a gun at her. “I didn’t think twice. I just ran back inside,” said Ntshangase. She said all the staff have been in shock since the incident. While nobody was hurt, the driver of the vehicle hadn’t been back to work because he is still traumatised by what happened, she said. Ntshangase said they have been victims of two burglaries this year and the hijacking on Friday was the final straw. She said on January 19 they arrived at work to find the company vehicles stripped of tyres and batteries. On January 30, less than 10 days later, their boardroom was broken into and the thieves took their computers and a gazebo. Police spokesperson Sergeant Mthokozisi Ngobese confirmed the incident. The car, a white Hyundai Etios with registration NP 162072, is still missing.