We won’t bury just the body. The family of a man from Kwamgwagwa location, near Mpophomeni, who was murdered and decapitated, are refusing to bury him until his head has been found. Senzo Mbanjwa’s body was found with stab wounds, in a suspected muthi-killing in the Nqabeni area. The gruesome discovery was made on Monday morning, days after Mbanjwa left his home to visit his girlfriend. According to his family, he left home on Friday, March 13, to go to KwaHhaza in Mpophomeni. While he left his girlfriend’s house the following day at about 4 am, he did not reach home and none of his family members could get hold of him on his cell phone. His family suspected something was amiss and reported him missing at the Taylor’s Halt local police station. The family kept calling Mbanjwa’s phone until they received the news of his death from locals who knew him and the family. His fully-clothed body was found in the Nqabeni location forest about three kilometres from his home, hidden under rocks in dense bush after locals in the area noticed “a foul smell”. Mbanjwa’s mother, Nompumelelo, said the family will not proceed with burial arrangements until police find the missing head. She said they were called by the locals who had found Mbanjwa’s body to come identify him. “From a distance I saw his feet and the t-shirt he was wearing and just knew it was him. “Even though I didn’t get close enough to get a good look at him, that day still haunts me,” said Nompumelelo. She believes that Mbanjwa was killed while walking home. His cell phone and wallet were also taken during the attack. “Police need to help us to find the head. My son will not rest in peace until we find his head. If there is no complete body, there is nothing I can do. I can’t bury my son without his head. If I bury him, I will be doing that for people because I know it’s not what I want,” she said. The distraught mother said she is now left to raise her son’s two daughters — aged five and six. She suspects the killing to be muthi-related and said three other people in the area had also been murdered in the same manner. “We want the police to bring the perpetrators to book. The way he was killed was very brutal and no one else must suffer the same fate.” She told The Witness that the incident had left her traumatised. “He was my one and only child. When I arrived at the scene, I fainted and woke up at home. I still can’t believe that he’s gone. I understand that death is inevitable, but no one deserves such a painful death.” Mbanjwa was described as a “fun and loving” man. KwaZulu-Natal police spokesperson Colonel Thembeka Mbele said a case of murder has been opened.