The wife of patient zero in the coronavirus case has tested positive for the disease, and she and the couple's two children will now join the man in quarantine. The first person to contract the disease, which has brought several countries to a standstill and battered the global market, lives in Hilton, KwaZulu-Natal, and contracted the virus while on holiday in Italy. Six other people - five in KZN and another in Gauteng - who were part of the man's holiday group also contracted the virus. The man's private doctor, Dr Robyn Reed, is also in quarantine, but has criticised the hysteria surrounding the disease spreading to South Africa. Only nine people from the group returned to South Africa — and have been tested. Coronavirus cases: The spread outside China A look at how coronavirus has spread outside China over the past two weeks. Patient Zero, a Hilton businessman, has been in quarantine at the hospital since he tested positive last Thursday after presenting with flu symptoms. Disappointed Speaking from his hospital bed, the man said he was disappointed his wife had tested positive and getting his children to join them in the ward had “not been an easy decision to make”. “I am sad that my wife has tested positive but I am pleased that the boys are both negative. In terms of protocol, my wife, as a confirmed patient, will join me in hospital. The boys will join us too to minimise the stress on them. In this way we can all be together and be monitored by the doctors. All three of them are still asymptomatic. The kids are in high spirits and are aware of what is going on,” said the man. He said while his wife had been quarantined with him on Tuesday, she had gone to her place of employment on Monday and the National Institute for Communicable Diseases (NICD) is conducting tests on all those who have been in contact with her. READ | South Africans spending thousands on hazmat suits fearing the coronavirus The man said he has made considerable progress and is confident he is well on the way to recovery but needs two negative test results before he could be discharged. Full of praise for the excellent care received thus far, the man confirmed he was in an isolation ward. “The staff here are excellent. I am in an isolation ward with constant observation and my vitals are being checked every two hours. It really is quiet here and I am well cared for by friendly and very professional staff. “The hospital has a very skilled team in terms of its infectious disease unit and isolation ward. While this can minimise the impact on the boys, it has not been an easy decision to make as I’m sure you’ll appreciate,” said the man. Overwhelming support Again grateful for the support he has received, he said he and his wife wished to further convey their gratitude for the support and “overwhelming love” shown to them. Health Minister Dr Zweli Mkhize said they will continue testing the children to ensure they remain negative. “Until then [when continuous tests produce negative results] they will be regarded as potentially infected. This means they will continue not to attend school. This is in an effort to curb the risk of spread to other children and teachers,” said Dr Mkhize. He said he had also spoken to the first confirmed patient on Sunday morning. “He was upbeat and jovial. I also spoke to the doctor who is treating him. She confirmed that this patient is responding well and is now asymptomatic. At the right time, as determined by the treating doctors, the patient will be retested to check his recovery progress,” said Mkhize. Cowan House Preparatory School, in Hilton, where the children are pupils, issued a further statement on Sunday saying with new developments in mind, they have been in consultation with the Independent Schools Association of South Africa (Isasa) and will engage further with the Department of Health and NICD with regards to the re-opening of the school on Tuesday. 