Hours before the World Health Organisation (WHO) officially designated the Covid-19 outbreak as a pandemic, KwaZulu-Natal Premier Sihle Zikalala announced it was “business as usual” in the province. Zikalala said any ban or restriction would happen “as and when needed as the situation arose”. He was addressing the cabinet, district and municipal mayors, community leaders and other stakeholders at the provincial Aids Council at the Grey’s Hospital on Wednesday. The World Health Organisation declared Covid-19 a global pandemic yesterday as the virus, unknown to world health officials just three months ago, has rapidly spread to more than 121 000 people across the world. Moshibudi Poncho Bapela, from the National Institute of Communicable Diseases (NICD), said at the briefing that “handshakes for now should also be prohibited”. She also advised that people were not “infectious during the 14- day incubation period” and that “people must stop touching their face, nose and ears” in a bid to stop the spread of the virus. KZN Department of Health head Dr Sandile Tshabalala further confirmed that there was “no scientific evidence to suggest a person was infectious in the incubation period”. A person is infectious if they have tested positive for Covid-19 and have symptoms, the doctors said. Worldwide, people who may have been exposed to the virus have been advised to self-isolate — even from their families — until they are proved by testing to be clear. Disspelling myths about the virus, Zikalala said it was “a fallacy that coronavirus did not affect black people”. “The general black population thinks that this virus does not affect them. But it does. It affects all people and I want everyone to be aware of that and take the necessary precautions,” he said, Zikalala added that any directive on further action would be taken in consultation with the national government. While no gatherings had yet been banned, an urgent decision would be taken over the fate of Africa’s first World Football Summit that was set to take place at the ICC Durban on March 17-18. Zikalala also said the KwaZulu-Natal government would: Household staff must not be left out if they have been in contact with the primary infected person. Churches in South Africa have taken steps to minimise the spread by telling parishioners to wash their hands and to stay home if they have a cold or flu-like symptoms. The Catholic Archdiocese of Durban said wine will not be given at communion and the bread would be placed in people’s hands, rather than their mouths. Priests will use hand sanitisers before communion. Methodist ministers have been told to wash their hands individually and not in a common basin during the service. The Muslim community in Pietermaritzburg said they would issue a statement on Thursday. Meanwhile, Patient Zero, whose family are in isolation with him at a local state hospital, said they were doing well. The four Durban patients are also doing well, they said. 