There is huge disappointment in the city that the Royal Agricultural Show (RAS) has been cancelled for the first time in 74 years. The last time the Royal Show did not take place was during World War 2. Mike Moncur, the president of the RAS, said that while he was bitterly disappointed that the Royal was cancelled, they had to be responsible. “We simply cannot have that [number] of people in one place. It would be irresponsible to the people of Pietermaritzburg, the Midlands and the province of KwaZulu-Natal.” Last year 129 050 people visited the Royal Show, which Terry Strachan, chief executive officer of the RAS, said generates in excess of R250 million for the benefit of the Pietermaritzburg region. He added that the decision to cancel had not been taken lightly and had involved discussions with the entire RAS board. “The guillotine came down last night when the president said that any organised mass gathering over 100 persons would be prohibited,” he added. “It would have portrayed us in a very bad light if we had rushed ahead with plans for the show, assuming that everything would be safe in May.” Chief executive officer of the Pietermaritzburg and Midlands Chamber of Business, Melanie Veness, said the cancellation of the Royal Show would have a knock-on effect on small businesses. “There is a high unemployment rate and there are many people doing business from home who rely on shows to be able to have access to markets for their goods. “All the service providers for the big events and people who do food services, sound and décor will also be affected. It’s a smack to everybody,” she added. For Moncur, the fact that farmers and those in the agricultural sector would be unable to showcase their animals and equipment was the biggest tragedy. “We were going to host two sheep nationals, for the Il de France and Hampshire Down breeds, and were going to host a special celebration for the Jerseys,” he added. “We were expecting over 100 animals in both sheep nationals. It’s really disappointing, but the whole thing is out of our hands. “I also feel really sorry for places like Weston who compete in the future farmers and steers competitions. Beefmaster breeders have once again given them animals, which they have been working hard to prepare all year and now they won’t be able to show them.” The KZN Jersey Cattle Club, which was due to host the 100th anniversary of Jersey SA in the cattle arena on May 27, said that while they were disappointed in the cancellation of the Royal Show, they understood its necessity. “We remain optimistic and will now focus our efforts toward the annual Jersey herd competition towards the end of the year.” The cancellation of the show is not the only event likely to affect the coffers of the RAS this year. The Royal Showgrounds in Pietermaritzburg are a popular venue for conferences and events, having most recently hosted the opening of the KZN Legislature and the provincial budget briefing. Strachan said that two major events had already been cancelled — the University of KwaZulu-Natal graduation ceremonies and a summit due to be hosted by the Department of Agriculture. Strachan said that while it was impossible to predict the course of the epidemic, the RAS would, if possible, try to find an alternate date for the show. In the meantime they are working on refunding money which had already been paid, and unwinding contracts with service providers. The Witness understands that the annual Bloemfontein Show, Nampo and the Rand Show have also been cancelled.