“Why is everybody sick?” “Is it the end of the world?” “Are we all going to die?” These are just some of the anxious questions parents have
been asked by their children since the outbreak of Covid-19.  Children are like sponges to everything
happening around them. Whatever fears that we have are amplified to them. Educational psychologist Naomi Holdt told Weekend Witness
that adults needed to work out their own fears first before addressing their
children. Holdt said fear was the first reaction felt by most South
Africans upon hearing about the presence of Covid-19, and children were not
exempt from that emotion. The psychologist said many of the children and teenagers she
has been seeing in therapy lately had grown anxious because of the virus. She
said they feared contracting the virus, their families becoming ill, and their
loved ones dying. “These are natural fears. Children are not immune to the
possibilities of what the presence of this virus could mean in our country,”
said Holdt. Holdt emphasised the fact that everyone feels empowered when
they know the facts, therefore she encourages parents to educate their children
about the virus. “Knowledge is power. Truth is power. Our children need to know
the truth without our own sense of panic attached to it,” said Holdt. Holdt said the first step when talking to children about
Covid-19, or any fearful situation, was to understand their emotions before
presenting facts. She said you must let your child know that fear is a natural
and normal response when faced with a concerning situation. “As soon as children feel understood, they will be more open
to listening to the facts,” said Holdt. Holdt said secondly, parents must note that children feel
empowered when they know how they can help. She suggested getting children involved in projects such as
collecting hand sanitisers for schools, children’s homes, old age homes and
places that are unable to afford them. “Covid-19 has created an opportunity for
people to teach their children the importance of showing care and compassion.
Adults should focus on being role models with attributes such as being
non-judgmental and kind to all those who have been directly impacted,” said
Holdt. FIVE THINGS TO REMEMBER WHEN CHATTING TO YOUR CHILDREN
ABOUT COVID-19: 1. Find out what your child already knows about the virus in
case there are some rumours they have heard, that you may need to rectify. 2. Remember to only share age-appropriate information. E.g.,
“People who have this virus may have a fever, a cough and some breathing
difficulties. “For children and adults with a healthy immune system,
getting Covid-19 would be like getting the flu. Nasty, but you would get over
it”. 3. Answer their questions as truthfully as you can. If you
are also unsure, first look it up on a reputable medical website. 4. Assure them that medical experts are working hard to
contain the virus and to ensure everyone’s safety. 5. Be proactive and teach good hygiene habits.   Holdt said the key to the nation getting
through is by avoiding dividing ourselves through blame, fear and criticism,
but instead we should unite with compassion. “This is an ideal opportunity for
South Africans to show the world the substance we are really made of.” HANDY ADVICE FROM THE WORLD HEALTH ORGANISATION (WHO): 1. Help children find ways to express their disturbing
feelings such as fear and sadness because every child has their own way of
expressing emotions. Engage in creative activities such as playing and drawing to
help facilitate this process. Children communicate their feelings better when
they are in a safe and supportive environment. 2. Avoid separating children from their primary caregivers.
If this happens, make sure that appropriate alternative care is there such as a
trusted family member or a social worker. Furthermore, ensure that regular contact is maintained
between the child and their parent through scheduled phone calls or video
calls. 3. If children are confined to the home, maintain familiar
routines in their daily life. Provide engaging activities and encourage them to
play and socialise with others — even if only within the family when advised to
restrict social contact. 4. Children tend to seek more attention and be demanding of
their parents when they are stressed. By discussing Covid-19 honestly with
them, you will ease their anxiety. Remember that children observe adult behaviours and emotions
for cues on how to manage their own emotions during difficult times.