The Witness offices were on Friday inundated with panicky
calls from the public inquiring about the coronavirus, complaining that the
Covid-19 helpline was not being answered and the lack of assistance at
government hospitals. A 43-year-old woman from Hayfields, who asked not to be
named, said she was referred to Grey’s Hospital by her doctor after displaying
severe flu-like symptoms, but said the hospital was not prepared for Covid-19
and she eventually had to leave without being tested for the virus. The woman, who works in Hilton, said she flew back from a
Johannesburg work trip two weeks ago and started having a dry cough. She said
on Thursday morning she woke up with a high temperature, so she went to the
doctor, who wrote her a letter to go and get tested for Covid-19 at Grey’s
Hospital, which is one of the four hospitals mandated to deal with coronavirus
cases in KZN. “The nurses had no face masks on, even after I showed them
the letter from my doctor, they didn’t isolate me. They made me sit in the
casualty area with other patients. “When the doctor arrived, he said I should go and wait
outside while they look for the keys to the isolation room.” The woman said another family, who claimed that they were
directly exposed to the Hilton man diagnosed with the virus, were also told to
wait outside. After waiting for almost two hours outside, she said she was
finally placed in a glass room with a bed, but no one attended to her. The
woman said she asked to leave and drove herself to a private medical centre for
assistance there. She said doctors ran several tests, but she decided to go
home where she is currently self-isolating and self-medicating. “The Health Department must stop telling the public that
they are well prepared to handle this outbreak because they’re not,” she said. Another local man, who also asked not to be named, told
Weekend Witness yesterday that he is now worried after having been in contact
with a woman who had been exposed to Covid-19 at the Grange Clinic. The man said he and other patients at the clinic were
exposed to a woman who came to report that her mother has been exposed to
someone who was exposed to the man diagnosed with the virus. The man said the woman’s mother works as a domestic worker
for the mother of the Hilton man who has coronavirus. “The nurses at the clinic
placed her in a separate room, away from us. Now I’m worried about being
exposed to this woman. The nurses don’t want to tell us anything and are giving
us face masks to wear,” said the man. KZN Health Department spokesperson Agiza Hlongwane said
Grey’s Hospital will investigate the incident.