Nine of the 122 South Africans being repatriated from Wuhan, China, the initial epicentre of the coronavirus, are from KwaZulu-Natal. The repatriation team and the repatriated South Africans are expected back in the country on Friday. They will be quarantined for 14 to 21 days at the Ranch Resort in Limpopo. During this period, the movement of people and goods in and out of the quarantine zone will be restricted. “We strongly caution people against attempting to make any physical contact or attempting to visit the quarantine zone. Once the quarantine period ends, and tests confirm no underlying Covid-19 infection of our compatriots, they will be released back into their respective communities,” Health Minister Zweli Mkhize said at a media briefing on Thursday night. The crew, all volunteers, who “raised their hands to take on this mission on behalf of South Africa”, will also be in quarantine at the facility. Mkhize said the South Africans due to land in Limpopo have all tested negative for coronavirus. The site, he said, was chosen as it was far from other communities and that 84 other sites looked at were not suitable. Mkhize said should any of the 122 test positive while in quarantine, they will be immediately removed and treated. He issued a stern warning that the area would be in complete quarantine and nobody would be allowed in. The facility will have a double perimeter line, be managed by the army and no fly-overs will be allowed. Police Minister Bheki Cele added that anyone attempting to cross the first red line and then the yellow line will be charged and “be there for 21 days”. The Health minister also responded to queries that over the past two weeks, there were FET students who went to Limpopo and several other provinces from China. “There's been a lot of speculation about the status of these students. We knew that they were not at risk; however, with mounting speculation, we felt it was important to take necessary precautions just to make sure this matter is put to bed. It was all agreed that these students must be called and we do the tests. “There were 14 students tested from Limpopo, two days ago. They have all tested negative. They do not have an infection. We want to put the issue behind us,” said Mkhize.