Day one of lockdown, the same day that South Africans heard there had been two deaths from Covid-19 — which was later changed to one death — inside the country, did not go as planned. Pietermaritzburg residents and many South Africans went about business as usual, paying little heed to the call to stay at home; there was a distinct abuse of permits for essential service providers and the taxi industry ground to a halt following a fall-out. But KwaZulu Natal Premier Sihle Zikalala is having none of it. At an urgent press briefing called on Friday afternoon, Zikalala laid down the law — a major clampdown on movement will be enforced going forward. He also warned those who were using permits and were not part of the essential services, that there would be a price to pay. “Our initial thoughts were that our citizens would pay heed and stay and home. One must remember that our state of emergency is not that of a war where people would be forced to do certain things. “We gave everyone a chance to follow the rules. But we have noticed, with great disappointment, that people are not taking their own health and well-being seriously. So we are forced to lay down the law in order to protect them and our country,” he said. The initial enforcement plan included random roadblocks at all entry and exit points into cities and major suburbs, but would now be ramped up to include continuous roadblocks throughout cities, suburbs and townships with SANDF members, who are yet to be deployed in the province. Raids were planned on taverns and other facilities where people continued to consume alcohol and socialise at. Zikalala also ordered an urgent investigation into an accident that claimed six lives in Richmond Road, saying the vehicle that caused the accident at around 2 am “should not have been there in the first place”. While the country recorded its first death on day one of the lockdown on Friday — a 48-year-old in the Western Cape — the number of positive patients climbed sharply to 1 170 on day 22. The results of a 28-year-old who was suspected to have died from Covid-19 came back negative, Health Minister Zweli Mkhize said. “She is therefore no longer considered a Covid-19 case.” With a multi-pronged enforcement plan that includes all SAPS units, municipal police, traffic officers and others, Zikhalala said they had to move ahead with the stricter regulations to ensure safety of all in the province. He said various MECs had gone to ground visiting areas to get a first-hand experience and while they were initially happy about the level of compliance, there was still “too much movement”. The premier confirmed that six more people (from Montclair in Durban) had been arrested since lockdown. This is in addition to two foreign tourists, a Lady­smith businessman who did not isolate himself despite testing positive, and 16 others who were caught swimming in Durban’s beaches. Zikalala said he was confident that the impasse with Santaco — that shut down all operations nationally on Friday — would be resolved. Contingency plans were being made for essential services government workers, especially in the medical field. He said they would continue sending a strong warning to retailers who have been raising food prices, and welcomed the arrest of a Phoenix meat-market owner who admitted to raising food prices. He also praised the leadership of Spar KZN where negotiations were under way to ensure contracts of Spar Franchise owners who raised food prices were terminated. Health MEC Nomagugu Simelane-Zulu confirmed there was a shortage of masks for healthcare workers, the government had received a 100 000 masks from China and more than 500 000 were in the process of being delivered. Meanwhile, bodies of people who die from Covid-19 will be triple bagged, according to new regulations, and medical staff handling them must wear full protection equipment and behave with caution, as if there is a biohazard risk. Families will also be given masks and gloves for viewing or identifying a body at a hospital or private mortuary. On a positive note, minister of Mineral Resources and Energy Gwede Mantashe announced a fuel price decrease on Friday afternoon, citing factors including the depreciation of the rand and the fall in international Brent crude oil prices. In a department statement, Mantashe said 93 unleaded petrol will be R1,76/l cheaper while 95 unleaded petrol will be reduced by R1,88/l. • Report non-compliance of lockdown to 033 845 2528 or 033 845 2535 or SAPS on 10111