The man charged with defrauding investors of more than R500 million, Sandile Clever Sibiya (29), has been denied bail, but his wife, Nomalizo Prudence Sibiya (37), was on Tuesday granted R50 000 bail. The bail was granted on condition that she reports twice weekly at a local police station and does not interfere with witnesses who would be known to her. Pietermaritzburg magistrate Chris van Vuuren handed down the finding but gave no reasons for it on record on Tuesday after meeting with the defence and prosecution in his offices. He said the written reasons for his decision are available if any of the parties require them. Only Nomalizo Sibiya of Supreme National Stockholdings (SNS Holdings) was in court for the bail verdict on Tuesday as she had been held in a police cell pending the judgment. Her husband is among prisoners who are currently awaiting trial in Pietermaritzburg New Prison. Their cases are being dealt with via Audio Video Recording (AVR) as no prisoners are currently being brought to court from New Prison. The bail application of the Sibiya couple has been steeped in controversy with the initial magistrate and prosecutor involved recusing themselves. When the case proceeded before Van Vuuren their advocate, Jerome Brauns, SC, argued that they ran a “legitimate logistics company” and paid tax. Brauns slated the state’s case against the couple, calling it weak, and suggested that they were not a flight risk as there was “no tangible evidence” of criminality. He said there was no evidence they operated a so-called “Ponzi” scheme. They face 14 counts of fraud, and counts of contravening the Bank Act and the Financial Advisory and Intermediary Services Act for allegedly operating like a bank and a financial advisory service. The prosecutor, Yashania Manickum, submitted an unsigned “intelligence report” compiled by Warrant Officer R. Gounden to reinforce its case that bail should not be granted. The report indicated that if granted bail Sandile Sibiya had plans to flee South Africa for Maputo in Mozambique, Zambia and Ghana. The report claimed Sibiya was being assisted by a man who rented out safe houses in all the countries where Sibiya would be hiding out, and that documents including a passport were being “manufactured” for him.