KZN Premier Sihle Zikalala has assured Pietermaritzburg residents that the provincial government will keep a close eye on the Msunduzi Municipality to ensure that council performs to the public’s expectations. Tabling his State Of the Province Address (Sopa) at the Royal Showgrounds on Wednesday, Zikalala said there were currently a number of programmes within the municipality meant to revamp Pietermaritzburg and the surrounding areas. “The focus is on the CBD regeneration, which includes addressing the visible urban decay and creating a conducive environment for business. “More vigorous law enforcement is being implemented at Msunduzi to address all unlawful activities. An application was also made to court to condemn derelict buildings with a view to demolishing and re-establishing with the current owners or the potential new owners. New traffic enforcement officers have also been appointed,” he said. The Msunduzi Municipality caught the attention of the provincial government following a series of service delivery failures, including the municipality’s failure to render a decent waste removal service. Zikalala said a lot was being done to restore the image of Msunduzi as the province’s capital city. “Waste management has been a major challenge at Msunduzi, but this is now changing. “The City has appointed service providers to take over the operations at the landfill site and to rehabilitate the site until security has been improved to stop illegal waste dumping,” he said. The service delivery failures at the municipality last year resulted in the removal of the council’s top leadership, including then mayor Themba Njilo, Zikalala said disciplinary steps were being taken against officials who have been implicated in corruption and maladministration at the municipality. “The city is vigorously enforcing consequence management, with 30 to 40 staff members currently undergoing disciplinary hearings. Some have been dismissed while others are on suspension,” he said. On the municipality’s vacant positions, which have been cited as part of the service delivery hiccups, Zikalala said everything was being done to ensure that all the vacancies at Msunduzi were filled. “In terms of institutional structure, the City manager position is in the process of being filled together with other vacancies,” he said. Apart from bringing in an administrator to oversee the municipality’s affairs, the provincial government also brought in a the new mayor, Mzi Thebolla, who was appointed in August. Zikalala said there had been major improvement since the arrival of the new Msunduzi leadership. “There are also changes in the financial management and governance and, as a result, there has been an improvement in the audit outcome from disclaimer to a qualified audit opinion. “The City is also aggressively focusing on revenue enhancement initiatives and cost containment strategies to stop unnecessary expenditure. We can say that our capital city is rapidly moving in the right direction,” he said.