With the Msunduzi Municipality now feeling the financial squeeze caused by the MK veterans’ illegal occupation of Aloe Ridge social housing project apartments in Westgate, the ANC has finally been pushed to act against its former soldiers. Almost two years after the veterans illegally took occupation of about 300 of the 950 apartments, the ANC this week summoned the war vets’ leadership to the ANC provincial headquarters in Durban, where they were told to either vacate the flats or face disciplinary measures. A source within the ANC’s top leadership told The Witness that the war veterans were told to vacate the area within the next two weeks. “They were told about the economic damage which their occupation was causing in Msunduzi and that they did not have any legitimate claim on the flats they have invaded,” the source said. The invasion saw the company that owns the flats, Capital City Housing (CCH), losing nearly R1 million a month, which led to its being placed in business rescue. It has since emerged that the company subsequently failed to pay tariffs to the Msunduzi Municipality, with the council now allegedly owed millions of rands. Msunduzi Mayor Mzi Thebolla, citing confidentiality clauses, declined to disclose the exact amount owed to Msunduzi, but said the municipality was under pressure to recoup its money from CCH. “We are worried that the municipality will not be able to recover its money should the company go under liquidation. As the Msunduzi Municipality, this is our main interest in the Aloe Ridge matter,” he said. At the time of the invasion the MK vets claimed that they occupied the flats because government had reneged on its promise to build houses for them. However, Thebolla said the municipality had already provided sites where the houses would have been built. “It is the relevant government department that should do the actual building of the houses,” he said. At the meeting with ANC leaders, the MK vets insisted that alternative accommodation should first be secured before they could move out. However, the request was rejected by the ANC leaders. “They were reminded that they had occupied the flats illegally and were therefore not in a position to make such kinds of demands,” the source said. While ANC provincial secretary Mike Mabuyakhulu, who is said to have presided over the meeting, declined to provide details, he confirmed that the meeting did take place. “At this stage I’m not at liberty to share the minutes of an ANC internal meeting with the media. However, what I can confirm is that a clear decision on the Aloe Ridge matter was taken,” Mabuyakhulu said. Contacted for comment, Mkhonto weSizwe Military Association (MKMVA) Moses Mabhida regional secretary Menzi Mkhize said the war veterans were ready to comply with any decision requesting them to vacate the flats. “In the first place we never said we wanted to live at the Aloe Ridge forever. All what we are requesting is that alternative accommodation should be made available before we leave. We can’t say people should vacate and live on the streets,” he said. The R353-million housing project, launched in 2014, was officially opened by former president Jacob Zuma in April last year. Sixty percent of the funding for the private/public project came from a government housing grant while the balance was raised through loans. CCH chief executive Ivor Caldecott said the company would welcome the withdrawal of the MK vets from the housing complex. “It would have come at the right time as the company was about to go under,” he said. 