The ANC in the Moses Mabhida region, which was scheduled to hold its elective conference next month, has cancelled all preparations for the event after several party members had been “denied” voting rights. ANC branches in the region had been scheduled to start holding branch general meetings (BGMs) as from last weekend, but the gatherings have been put on ice indefinitely after some people complained that their names had been removed from the voters’ roll. Sources within the ANC in the region told The Witness that several branches have submitted objections after the names of party members who were in good standing were missing from the voters’ roll. “The whole thing is a mess, it is a repeat of the previous years where people were removed from the voters’ roll on the basis of their affiliation to a rival faction within the party. So far there has not been any explanation on why so many people were not on the voters’ roll,” the source said. In the past, ANC members in the region had to resort to the courts after their names had not appeared on voters’ rolls. The ANC Moses Mabhida region, which was initially supposed to hold its regional conference in 2018, could not do so due to disputes over the voters’ roll. The disputes resulted in the Pieter­maritzburg high court blaming the practice of gate-keeping, where a dominant faction within an ANC branch excluded party members perceived to be affiliated to rival faction from voting processes. During the build-up to the 2017 ANC national conference, gate-keepers in the ANC’s Willowfountain branch, where Health Minister Zweli Mkhize resides, removed his name from the roll after he had failed to throw his weight behind either of the two ANC presidential candidates — former AU chair Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma and President Cyril Ramaphosa. “Our concern is that the current Regional Task Team (RTT), which was appointed to fight the culture of gate-keeping within the ANC in the region, is not doing what it has been appointed to do,” the ANC source said. ANC Moses Mabhida RTT co-ordinator Mandla Zondi confirmed that BGMs in the region have been put on hold. “The decision to suspend the BGMs came after we have been informed that some ANC members in the region had lodged objections with the ANC provincial office. “The objections will be forwarded to the ANC national office in Luthuli House where they will be assessed and, if needs be, the voters’ roll will then be corrected,” he said. Before the objections the ANC leadership had set April 17 and 18 as the days on which the regional conference would be held. However, Zondi said it was highly likely that the date will now be moved back. “The roadmap will now have to change to accommodate the delays caused by the appeal process.” Zondi denied that the RTT was to blame for the missing names. “It has nothing to do with the RTT as the process was handled by Luthuli House,” he said.