From Sweetwaters to Edendale to Imbali, residents of Msunduzi gathered freely, some having street bashes, while police checks were limited to key traffic arteries within the city. However, police said on Sunday that they had identified hotspots around Pietermaritzburg where they would be deploying more officers. Police Minister Bheki Cele is also expected to visit the city as part of a tour of roadblocks set up around KZN today. At Edendale Spar yesterday, residents wanting to buy groceries spent the day in long queues where social distancing rules were completely ignored. Siyabonga Maseko, a matric pupil from Imbali who was visibly uncomfortable due to the pushing and shoving going on in the queue, said he was concerned about the risk of being infected with the coronavirus. “It’s chaotic here. Things are much better in town because the shops there observe the social distancing rules. I’m stuck here because there is no transport to town as minibus taxis are currently not operating. I know it is not safe to stand in a queue like this but I have no choice as we have run out of food at home,” he said. In the nearby Esigodini township men could be seen gathered at car wash businesses, with music blaring from car radios. While liquor outlets remained shut, people had resorted to gathering in groups outside tuck-shops and other public spaces. During a two-hour drive through the townships, The Witness did not come across a single police roadblock. But in the CBD, security measures were much tighter — unlike in the previous two days where residents, including the homeless, roamed the streets — with police setting up a massive roadblock at the corner of Mayor’s Walk and Winston Road. Several motorists from areas such as Prestbury, Hilton and Sweetwaters wanting to enter the CBD to buy groceries were turned back. “Madam, you just drove past the Mayor’s Walk Spar. No, no, no, the regulations say you must buy at the shop nearest to your home. I’m afraid you have to turn back,” a police officer told one of the motorists. Apart from the roadblock, police also conducted random checks on vehicles and pedestrians within the CBD. In Chatterton Road, police turned back a minibus driver transporting what he claimed were staff from Woolworths, after it transpired that the passengers had no proper documents proving that they were allowed to work during the lockdown. A police officer who spoke on condition of anonymity said many of the people they had stopped where either walking or driving within the city in violation of lockdown rules. “They seem not to understand that they should be at home and not on the streets. One lady told us that she was going to fetch her clothes which she had left at a friend’s place. That’s not a justifiable reason to be on the street,” he said. The lack of police visibility in most parts of the city was in contrast with the provincial government’s undertaking that police and the army would be deployed in all parts of the province to enforce lockdown regulations. The KZN Community Safety Department, which is responsible for the co-ordination of police and army deployment in the province, said it had already identified non-compliance hotspots around Pietermaritzburg and would be dispatching more police. “What people should acknowledge is the fact that there has been a massive improvement in the last few days. “As we speak, people are being arrested for violating the lockdown regulations and more roadblocks are being set up,” said the department’s spokesperson, Kwanele Ncalane. On the absence of the army, Ncalane said the soldiers will be deployed to Pietermaritzburg and other areas within the next few days. Police said on Friday they had arrested more than 55 people nationally, while in Gauteng alone arrests stood at 148 people yesterday with warnings issued to 25 others for failing to adhere to lockdown regulations. Police in KZN have not issued figures and national spokesperson Brigadier Vishnu Naidoo said yesterday that figures on the total number of arrests were still being consolidated. Police are either arresting those who are breaking the lockdown rules, or giving them a “J534” notice to pay an admission of guilt fine. What action is taken depends on the severity of the offence, Naidoo emphasised. In Durban, meanwhile, a factory owner has been arrested for locking workers into a factory to produce face masks. The KZN MEC for Economic Development, Tourism and Environmental Affairs, Nomusa Dube-Ncube, said the 14 workers had allegedly been locked in since last Monday at a Chinese company, Chen Lu, located in Glen Anil. She said that during an unannounced visit to various retail shops and pharmacies at the weekend, it was found that people are paying up to R780 for a mask. The workers were taken to various townships in the greater Durban area. The MEC has also asked that the company be investigated to ascertain whether a Chinese national who was carrying an automatic rifle and harassing government officials, has the necessary permit for the weapon. He must also be charged for defeating the ends of justice.