After 14 days in hospital isolation, South Africa’s first Covid-19 positive person, Patient Zero, has still not received his double negative tests although he is in good health and has made a complete recovery. Hilton doctor Robyn Reed, who diagnosed Patient Zero after he presented with flu symptoms after a skiing trip to Italy, was back at work yesterday at her medical practice after her 14-day quarantine. The four other positive patients who were on the same skiing trip and are in a Durban hospital, have also recovered and are awaiting their double negative tests. Patient Zero, who is at a Pietermaritzburg hospital together with his wife, who has also tested positive, and their two children, who tested negative, said he was “champing at the bit” to get back to normal life. Spending his days working remotely from the ward, Patient Zero said he was managing to hold the fort. “I’ve been working from the ward although some things are difficult or impossible to complete from here. Mostly things have continued but just from a very different location. “We are doing well, thanks, but just staring down days in the isolation ward now. The days are getting long but I’m still here, holding the fort. We are trying to keep positive. Staff here at the hospital have been absolutely brilliant. I cannot speak more highly of them,” said Patient Zero. He said the family are all in good spirits. For the last few nights, friends have been dropping off supper. “That has really been sincerely appreciated and enjoyed.” Commending President Cyril Ramaphosa on declaring a state of disaster and imposing a travel ban, Patient Zero said the action was “well-thought out”. “It’s a good measure and good response, I thought. I think the government has done the right thing by being decisive and trying to curb and limit the rate of infection, but sadly the media hype has not helped the panic,” he said. Anxiously awaiting his test results from Sunday morning, he said he understood there could be a delay. “Test results usually take two days but I believe they are quite hectic at the lab as one can understand. It’s okay. “We are in good health and just have to wait it out now. “We haven’t received any treatment while in hospital — as we were okay even though we are positive,” he said. The Durban man who was part of the same group also said they were in “good spirits, catching up with work and watching movies” and were waiting for the two negative results. Dr Reed felt bittersweet about her self-quarantine period ending. “I’m just so glad to be back at work, in the swing of things, but I must say I quite enjoyed my isolation. I got time to reflect and catch up on all the things I have never been able to do before. It has been a time for great introspection and if it was not for earning a living, I would have gladly taken a 44-month self-isolation period,” quipped the jovial doctor. Confirming that her practice was quieter than normal, she said, however, that they were receiving many phone calls from people wanting to have Covid-19 tests done. “We explained the criteria for having a test but there are still many people who want to have the test done just to make sure they are okay,” she said. Dr Reed said while she expected some kind of hostility upon her return, people were perplexed that she was in good health. “That’s exactly what I have been trying to explain. Covid-19 is not a death sentence for those who are well, who do not have other health complications, and a healthy immune system. You will live if you do not have any pre-existing conditions,” she said.