Two suspected gangsters were hunted down and killed in a hail of bullets in Eastwood in what is believed to have been a revenge attack after a member of another gang was killed hours earlier. On Sunday, Warrant Officer Joshua Maistry of Mountain Rise SAPS said it is alleged that Sfiso Rulumeni (31) and Rasta Maduna (41) together with another person were driving along Tarentaal Road towards eThembalihle township when they came under fire from people in a VW Polo. “The suspects fired indiscriminately at the victims’ vehicle, a Honda Jazz, riddling it with bullet holes. The driver [Maduna] and the front passenger [Rulumeni] both succumbed to gunshot wounds,” said Maistry. The third victim, whose name is known to The Witness, was taken to hospital. “Subsequent investigations revealed that one of the deceased, namely Rasta Maduna, was involved in a murder in Ash Road in the SAPS Pietermaritzburg policing precinct. “Detective members from SAPS Pietermaritzburg­ and SAPS Mountain Rise are working together to unravel the sequence of events to link both cases and identify the perpetrators,” said Maistry. At the time of publication, the police had not confirmed the identity of the Ash Road shooting victim but sources said he was believed to have links to a gang. The Witness was told that at least 11 shots were fired at him by his attackers. The brazen attack on the Honda has left the quiet neighbourhood of Tarentaal Road shaken. Residents said they could hear gunshots from the distance before the cars sped past their homes. When The Witness visited the scene, residents were standing along the road watching police officers as they gathered evidence. A trail of blood covered the ground and part of a fence where Rulumeni had rested before collapsing in the yard of one of the properties, where he took his last breath. The owner of the home, who asked not to be named, said she was napping in her bedroom when she was woken by the children’s screams. “When I opened my eyes I heard gunshots and one of my neighbours screaming 'get down!'. We got down and laid there on our bellies but I had no idea that someone was already in my yard,” she said. She said they could not see anything because the bedrooms are on the other side of the house and Rulumeni’s body was found just a few metres from the gate. “I didn’t realise what had happened until the neighbours and the police came.” Other residents were either watching television or preparing dinner when the incident happened. “It’s by the grace of God that it was cold so there were no children playing outside because they could have been caught in the crossfire,” said one of them. Sounds of wailing echoed in Tarentaal Road as the evening settled when Maduna’s loved ones arrived from the neighbouring eThembalihle township. His sister, Nosipho Maduna, was inconsolable and refused to even go to his car where his body was. “I’m not ready to see him like that,” she said through her tears. She told The Witness the rest of her family were in uMzimkhulu but she had recently joined her two elder brothers in Pietermaritzburg to look for work. “I don’t even know how I’m going to tell the elders what happened. “It would have been better if he had gotten sick because we would have had time to say goodbye and prepare ourselves for his departure, but I guess this is how God wanted him to go,” Nosipho said on Saturday. She said his four children are going to be devastated and her heart ached just thinking about them. Nosipho said her brother was not a violent person and as far as she knew, he was not involved in any gang-related activities either. She said he worked as a packer in one of the local warehouses. She did not know the people Maduna was travelling with, saying he had a lot of friends around Pietermaritzburg. “If he was suspected of committing a crime then they should have let the police investigate and arrest him. “He is now dead and yet there is still no proof that he’s done what they are accusing him of,” she said.