Msunduzi Acting Municipal Manager Nelly Ngcobo is seeking court protection after a cellphone conversation she had with a person who appears to be seeking favours on behalf of tenderpreneurs was distributed on social media. In the audio clip of the conversation between Ngcobo and the man, Ngcobo agrees to go to the (MR) Minister Representative (Administrator) to check what was holding up the finalisation of a contract between the municipality and a potential service provider. “You must send me the name of the company and I will check,” she is heard saying. The caller then thanks Ngcobo before proposing that the two should meet at “our usual place” the next day. “It’s fine but you must first confirm with me in the morning. You must send the name of the company to someone else’s cellphone and not mine,” Ngcobo responds. Msunduzi is currently under administration. However, it was not clear whether in the audio clip Ngcobo was referring to the current administrator Scelo Duma or his predecessor, Sbu Sithole, who left last month. Approached for comment, Ngcobo, who did not deny that it was her voice on the audio clip, claimed that the conversation was deliberately distorted to portray her as a corrupt person. “Some parts of the conversation were edited to suit some people’s agenda. I have already briefed my lawyers on the matter and they were in the process of lodging a court application against whoever is behind this,” she said. Ngcobo, who was the municipality’s chief financial officer (CFO) before being appointed as the acting MM last year, said the man she was in cellphone conversation with was an employee of the municipality. “This was a normal work-related conversation where an employee of the municipality was asking me for an update on a particular matter. In case some people were not aware, I receive such requests from staff on a regular basis,” she said. Asked whether she had been set up, Ngcobo said there was a possibility that “someone paid some people to make me look like a corrupt person”. “My lawyers will get to the bottom of this matter and establish who exactly is behind this. It is shocking to find that some people are prepared to do anything to tarnish a person’s image,” she said. Last year the ANC in KwaZulu-Natal axed the entire Msunduzi political leadership, including mayor Themba Njilo, after the party accused the municipality’s top brass of turning a blind eye to widespread corruption and maladministration at the council. In his State of the Province Address (Sopa) last week, KZN Premier Sihle Zikalala announced that 40 Msunduzi employees were currently facing disciplinary action for various transgressions, including corruption. Several other employees, Zikalala said, have either been dismissed or placed on suspension.