South Africa’s first Covid-19 patient has sent out a brave
message to the country. “South Africa, thank you for all the love and support from
family and friends — we live in a special part of the world and situations like
this are a wonderful reminder thereof,” said the man in a Whats­App message to
Weekend Witness. Speaking exclusively to Weekend Witness, the Hilton man said
he was expecting to be given the green-light in three to seven days. “As soon as I am cleared with zero emissions, the NICD
[National Institute for Communicable Diseases] will then re-assess. This can
take anything from three to seven days,” he said. The first thing he wants to do when he is out of quarantine,
he said, is to “give my wife and boys a big and long hug”. The 38-year-old father of two was admitted to a public
hospital in KwaZulu-Natal on Thursday night for “observation in line with the
Department of Health protocol for confirmed cases”. In good spirits and feeling “progressively better”, the man
was full of praise for the medical personnel dealing with him. “I’m receiving excellent care from the infectious disease
team here. I am recovering well and really appreciate all the love and support
from family and friends. The NICD, health practitioners and local teams have
been absolutely excellent,” said the man. His hospital admission, he was told, was precautionary. “It is precautionary and a necessity such that the 14-day
quarantine period for my family can begin and I can be observed,” he said. The businessman was diagnosed with the virus on Thursday
after he was tested on Tuesday. He presented with flu-like symptoms of an achy
body, headache and fever on Sunday (March 1) shortly after returning from a
skiing holiday in northern Italy. He had flown, together with his wife and eight other
friends, from King Shaka airport to Dubai and Zurich, and then to Lavigno,
Italy, and back. The man said he and other travellers were all screened at
every airport with a temperature check and cleared. He saw local doctor Robyn Reed on Tuesday after not being
able to shake off the flu-like symptoms and she advised him to test for the
virus as he had returned from Italy, which is now considered a “hot-spot”. “Dr Reed was brilliant and advised us to self quarantine at
home while we awaited results. We were told to practice good hygiene [ie avoid
contact with anyone, wash hands, cough into tissue paper and dispose, sanitise
thereafter, remain indoors],” said the man. Dr Reed on Friday confirmed she and her staff had also been
tested and were in quarantine for 14 days as a precautionary measure. She called for calm amid all the hype. “It’s difficult to say what the effect of this is going to
be at this stage. I’m hoping it is a huge storm in a teacup. Many people die
from other more serious matters and there is no hysteria about that,” she said. Dr Reed confirmed that the patient had arrived at her rooms
at about 10.15 am on Tuesday morning — when her practice was relatively empty. “It’s fortunate that he didn’t even sneeze or cough; and
neither did he go up to anyone and hug or kiss them. He doesn’t even have any
of those symptoms,” said the doctor. The patient, who has been spending his time doing a bit of
work from his laptop and reading, said his family were also doing well. “They were visited by the NICD this [Friday] morning to
check if they were all okay. The NICD staff have been extremely sensitive and
considerate of our young boys and they [the boys] seemed to have enjoyed the
process as much as possible,” he said. The family are expecting their results today. The businessman said the group he had travelled with were
from across KwaZulu-Natal but have asked to remain anonymous. “The NICD do know them and their whereabouts and have been
in contact with them. They are all in home quarantine,” he said.