A man allegedly masquerading as an Msunduzi Municipality employee carrying out disconnections was beaten to death by an angry mob at Sobantu on Wednesday. The man had apparently been going door to door pretending to check if residents there were illegally connected or had tampered with their meters. It’s believed the trouble started when he allegedly asked some of the residents to pay him between R150 and R300 if they did not want to be cut off. This, residents believed, resulted in him being beaten up and marched to the Sobantu satellite police station where he died shortly after his arrival. However, The Witness could not find anyone willing to admit they were a victim of the alleged conman after his death. Warrant Officer Joshua Maistry of Mountain Rise SAPS said the police are investigating a case of murder. He said the man succumbed to injuries he sustained during the attack by angry residents when they found out that he was lying to them about being sent by Msunduzi. He had bruises and was bleeding from the mouth. The incident comes hot on the heels of Msunduzi releasing media statements threatening to disconnect properties whose accounts were in arrears. Community activist Tana Mbokazi, who works in the councillor’s office, was alerted by residents of the man’s presence in the area on Wednesday and that he was allegedly asking for bribes. She said she immediately called the municipality to find out if one of its officials had been deployed to carry out disconnections and the City denied this. “Msunduzi needs to investigate how he came to have papers with the municipality’s emblem because he was carrying a pile of those, which is why most people believed that he was legit,” she said. Mbokazi said electricity was a sensitive issue in Sobantu as the City had previously threatened to disconnect properties over historical debt. “As things stand, the community is waiting for the municipality to respond to its invitation for a meeting to discuss the issue so this guy stepped on a landmine.” A resident, who asked not to be named, said she was watching television at home when she heard the man calling for her attention at the gate. “He told me he was sent by the municipality to check if we were not stealing electricity,” said the woman. She said he asked to check their electricity meter box. The woman said the man, who was dressed in a worn-out jacket that looked like the overalls worn by municipal workers and safety boots, was very convincing as he kept on scribbling notes on the clipboard he was carrying. He told her there was a busload of other municipal workers he was working with around Sobantu. Her uncle asked him if the municipality was planning on installing new electricity boxes, but he said they were just doing routine checks. “After taking down more notes, he pressed the buttons on the electricity meter box again and the television went off. I was so shocked and then he laughed and told me that’s how they check if we are stealing electricity. “He told me to use the remote to turn the television back on again.” She said the man did not ask for money from her. He then went to the house opposite their home and she later saw him at the electricity box on the street taking down more notes. “It’s just scary that these criminals are so brave that they can come into our homes. We are not safe,” she said. Another resident told The Witness that the same man came to her house and was reeking of alcohol. “He kept on writing on his clipboard and pressing the buttons on our electricity meter box. “His accent did not sound South African, so I asked him what his surname was. He lied and said his surname was Khumalo and said he spoke fluent Sotho, but when I started speaking Sotho with him, he laughed it off.” A resident who saw the murder victim’s appointment card said the surname on it was Dlamini. He said he told him that he was working for a company that had been appointed by Msunduzi to deal with electricity theft. Apparently residents from Dark City, a small settlement neighbouring Sobantu, had also set dogs on the man on Tuesday. CONMAN ALLEGED ONE OF THREE SCAMMERS Msunduzi spokesperson Ntobeko Ngcobo confirmed that the man was neither an employee nor a contractor of the municipality. She said it was alleged that he was part of a trio who were scamming and soliciting bribes in Sobantu. “It has also been alleged that the men have been operating for quite some time and extorting money from residents in Northdale areas. “The revenue department did not issue a list of any property to be disconnected in Sobantu; also the electricity department did not carry out any audit on meters in Sobantu. “We are encouraging anyone who has been scammed by the men to come forward, the information will assist the police as they investigate the matter further,” she said. Ngcobo urged communities to refrain from taking the law into their own hands but rather report and let the police do their job by investigating and arresting suspects involved in criminal activities. The members of the public are encouraged to report any fraud and corruption activities through the City’s anonymous tip-off hotline at 0801 000545 or e-mail Msunduzi@ tip-offs.com 