A 72-year-old Hilton woman who has tested positive for Covid-19 and who is in self-isolation at her upmarket estate home said she has “no idea where she got it from”. The woman, who asked not to be named, said she was trying to figure out how she contracted the virus as she had not travelled internationally recently. She is the second person to have tested positive at the estate and they are now awaiting her husband’s test results. “I did meet some friends from overseas about three weeks ago but none of them have tested positive. “I just don’t know where I got it from and before I got my results, I have been continuing with my life as usual — shopping locally here in Hilton and then in Pietermaritzburg. “So, I’m not sure if it is locally transmitted either,” said the woman. She said while she had been feeling “out-of-sorts” for a few days for the past week with a “mild sore throat mostly”, listening to the Cape Town patient’s experience had spurred her on to have a test. “My symptoms were so mild … sporadic temperature spikes that I thought were hot flushes as I am at that age, very mild sore throat and a general feeling of being out of sorts. “I didn’t even have any headaches. It was only when I heard this guy describe how he felt that the penny dropped. “I wanted to have a test but my family thought I was over-reacting. Even the medical facility was reluctant to test me — it was only because I informed them that I was taking care of someone ill that they agreed,” said the woman. She eventually had her test done on Wednesday and received her results on Sunday. “It just goes to show that people must be really vigilant and if they have any symptoms — mild or otherwise — to just stay at home. “I thought there was nothing wrong with me and continued with my daily life. All I can say is be in tune with yourself and know when you have to take action,” said the woman. She has been self-isolating since going for her test on Wednesday and is still waiting to hear from the NICD. “I haven’t heard from the NICD as yet. They are probably waiting for my husband’s test results. “I’ve been checking with my doctor over the phone. Yesterday I felt my chest was a bit tight but the doctor said that was because I was talking quite a bit on the phone. So the doctor asked me to take it a bit easy and get some rest,” said the woman. The estate where the woman and her husband live on Sunday released a statement advising measures that include the closure of the gym and swimming pool, estate restaurants, all exercise classes, and estate staff office. In addition, the chairperson of the estate home-owners’ association set out precautionary measures to be taken to ensure the estate does not go into lockdown. Some of those measures include: no visitors, social distancing, all live-in staff should not be leaving the property, staff tea-breaks on the communal lawns are a considerable risk, any community initiatives such as Bridge, Poker, card evenings, etc are cancelled, and children are not to visit each other on the estate, among others.