Twenty social workers have been appointed to help police deal with gender-based violence in the Pietermaritzburg area, where the Plessislaer police station has recorded the highest number of cases in the province. They are among more than 180 social workers who will be placed in police stations around the province as part of the programme. Launching the social workers programme on gender-based violence in Durban on Monday, KZN Premier Sihle Zikalala said the provincial government resolved to come up with a programme designed to fight gender-based violence after statistics had shown an escalation in gender-based violence in the province. He said the 886 victims of gender-based violence in KZN comprised 665 women, 130 boys and 91 girls. “This calls for us as government and all other stakeholders to double our efforts to deal with this scourge, which has become a nightmare,” he said. In the uMgungundlovu district alone, 240 to 260 cases of gender-based violence are reported per month, with the bulk at the Plessislaer police station. The provincial government is the first in the country to launch an initiative specifically targeting gender-based violence following President Cyril Ramaphosa’s announcement that R1,6 billion will be set aside to fight the scourge. The roping in of social workers will run parallel to several other initiatives, including the amendment of the law to make it difficult for perpetrators to get bail. “The plan is based on four critical pillars, namely prevention; education and awareness; strengthening the criminal justice system; ensuring adequate care, support and healing for victims; and strengthening the economic empowerment of women,” Zikalala said. According to the latest national crime statistics, sexual offences against children had increased to more than 24 000 reported cases, 1 184 children had been victims of attempted murder and more than 17 000 had reported assault. The spike in gender-related attacks has since seen various gender groups staging protests. Speaking during the same event, KZN Social Development MEC Nonhlanhla Khoza said the social workers, who had undergone rigorous training on gender-related issues, would be based in communities where gender-based violence was rife. “These social workers will also engage in prevention and awareness programmes on social ills and promote the involvement of men as active partners for women and girls’ human rights and as agents of change in the fight against GBV and HIV and Aids in our communities,” she said. The provincial treasury, Khoza said, had allocated R14,4 million to roll out the programme. “The allocation of social workers is based on the crime hotspot districts and the prevalence of incidents of gender-based violence,” she said. Gender groups have welcomed the provincial government’s initiative, with the Pietermaritzburg-based Lifeline saying the initiative will restore the dignity of gender-based violence survivors. “It means that survivors wanting to lay charges at a police station will no longer be at the mercy of policemen who are not trained on issues of gender-based violence,” Lifeline director Sinikiwe Biyela said. “What this programme will do is to decentralise services for gender-based violence survivors,” she said.