One of Addington Hospital’s four
patients who have tested positive for Covid-19 and want to be released, said
all they were asking for was “national consistency”. He said they were aware
that over 100 positive patients were allowed to self-isolate at their homes. He said, in an additional lawyer’s
letter sent to the KZN MEC for Health on Friday, that they were willing to
submit to any conditions imposed by the Health Department if released. The four patients on Thursday
evening, through their attorney, sent a letter to the KZN Department of Health
saying they no longer want to be “kept captive by the state”. They have been in isolation at the
hospital for 11 days after testing positive after a trip with 10 others to
Italy. The group returned on March 1 and seven of them, including Patient Zero
and his wife – who have since been released in isolation at their home, testing
positive. Despite giving the KZN MEC for Health
Nomagugu Simelane-Zulu a deadline of replying to their demands by 12 noon on
Friday, none was forthcoming even though she had submitted a statement to the
media. The group on Friday then issued
another letter, through their attorney Mark Futcher, giving the MEC until the
close of business on Friday to respond, failing which they would seek other
relief, including an urgent order. In the second letter, the four
patients offered further conditional undertakings that included them being
visited at any time by a health practitioner or member of the SAPS to ensure
they are complying with their self-imposed quarantine and that they will make
themselves available, as and when requested, by a state official for further
testing and/or treatment. “They reiterate their undertaking not
to have any contact with any other persons during this quarantine period and
will abide by any, or other, requirements set out by the state in regard to
their self-quarantine,” read the letter. The patient, who has been in contact
with The Witness since his admission to the hospital, said on Friday that “this
was not about us being unhappy with the facility”. “This is about us being kept in a
hospital ward for 11 days using state resources that are not required.
Addington Hospital staff and doctors have been good and the facility is
adequate. We have not pushed any request to transfer to a private hospital. “We have been asking to be released
to self-isolate at home, which the doctors and NICD are in agreement with, but
the MEC for Health is not allowing it without reason to us. “However, there are over 100 infected
people in SA currently self-isolating at home, hence we are asking for
consistency. Let the hospital beds be made available to those that need
hospital care and let us go home to self-isolate until negative,” he said. The patient questioned what would
happen when beds ran out. “The only treatment we received was
testing vitals. How do you treat a patient that is asymptomatic?” he asked. The KZN Department of Health did not
respond to the lawyer’s letter but in a response on Friday said that they will
not be “held ransom by any individuals who appear to seek special treatment”. “We have an obligation to follow all
clinical management protocols for confirmed cases. The National Health Act
makes it very clear that if any person who is a clinical or laboratory
confirmed case refuses to be tested, treated, isolated or quarantined, the head
of the provincial Health Department is empowered to approach the high court for
an appropriate order to force the person to comply. If we get pushed, we will
not hesitate to go the legal route to safeguard the interests of the public,”
said Simelane-Zulu. The national Health Department did
not respond to queries on the number of positive patients in isolation at
hospitals and the allegation that 100 positive patients were in self-isolation
at their homes.