Vagrants around the city have been rounded up and accommodated at a Transnet building in Mayor’s Walk, Prestbury. An official said that they are being provided with food, water, blankets and shelter. “The facility has showers, toilets and electricity,” he said. They are made up of mainly young people, with a few older people. Criminals who have served jail time are part of the crowd. Among them are also the mentally disturbed. On Saturday, an unstable man forced a small ring into his finger that sliced through his skin. He had to receive medical treatment. While some people stayed at the facility all of Saturday, others left and returned in the afternoon. Most remained at the premises on Sunday. “We are going out with security all the time. Nobody should be out,” the official added. Vic Gotti of Gotti Watchmen said that a vagrant was stopped yesterday morning while trying to climb over a garden wall in Beaumont Road, Blackridge. This man alleged that the vagrants are being treated badly and that there is no food and water at the facility. City officials denied this. Gotti is concerned that the vagrants who escape from the housing facility may turn to crime in the area. “We apprehended eight vagrants this weekend,” he said. Lelani van den Berg, a legal adviser in the office of the City manager, sent out a WhatsApp message in her personal capacity asking for public assistance. She said there are currently 142 homeless people at the shelter. “We need food, soap, sponges [mattresses] and blankets. “If you have an old blanket to donate please get in touch with me … if you have soap/packet of maize etc, it will be appreciated. “During this time I have a permit to move around. Alternative donations will be welcome, anything from R50. “I will give feedback on the amount of donations and what I have bought. Please if you can, help me with the Mayor’s Walk homeless shelter project,” she added. Asked to comment, Msunduzi Municipality spokesperson Thobeka Mafumbatha said the municipality has picked up 240 homeless people — 225 men and 15 women. There are currently no minors at the shelter. “Some of the people have made attempts to escape and have been successful. Security has since put in place measures to ensure that the people can’t escape. Efforts are constantly in place by security to bring back those that have escaped,” she said. Mafumbatha added that the Departments of Social Development and Health are assessing the vagrants. Two people have been taken to hospital for further treatment. She said the shelter has 30 rooms and can accommodate 10 people in each room with a spacing of two metres apart. There is hot and cold water, adequate lighting and a field to exercise. Each person has their own blanket and mattress and they have been provided with towels, soap and toilet paper. “The area is confined and does not pose a danger to the immediate neighbours.” Mafumbatha added that a food source has been secured for the next few days. The municipality is looking for donations and assistance from NGOs, the community and business who are able and willing to assist. Anyone who can assist can contact Van den Berg at 082 877 7391 or 060 577 3033, or e-mail her at Lelani.vandenBerg@msunduzi.gov.za