Shut them down. Msunduzi Municipality has instructed its technical services unit to shut down car wash businesses that have been raking in thousands of rands without turning over a cent to the municipality. The City is battling to recover more than R4 billion owed by residents, and is clamping down on car wash businesses that utilise municipal water without paying for the service. A councillor who attended Wednesday’s closed full council meeting at City Hall, said Mayor Mzi Thebolla has instructed the general manager for technical services to report on progress in three months. Action against the businesses, which are mostly in townships such as Sobantu, Imbali and Sweetwaters, is being taken as pressure mounts on the municipality to jack up its revenue streams. Apart from illegal water connections, the City is battling the problem of illegal electricity connections, with thousands of residents not paying a cent towards the electricity they consume every month. Residents who are legally connected to the municipality’s water and electricity grids had also not been settling their debts. According to the municipality’s finance unit, legally-connected rate payers were paying Msunduzi R45 million less than they should be paying every month. However, the DA was of the view that the situation was much bleaker than the one being presented by the mayor and his officials. “As the DA in Msunduzi we have conducted research on the matter around the payment of services and found that more than 80 000 households were receiving services from the municipality free of charge,” DA Msunduzi Caucus leader, Sbongiseni Majola, said. Last month, Thebolla announced the municipality would be embarking on a campaign to disconnect illegally connected residents as part of measures to boost the council’s coffers, which have been depleted by the poor performance of the economy accompanied by corruption and mismanagement. However, the municipality has since put the campaign on ice, with Thebolla reportedly saying the announcement was meant to threaten those illegally connected so they would start paying. Majola said the municipality would collapse if nothing was done about people consuming services for free. “The current situation is totally unsustainable. Apart from the mayor’s U-turn on the disconnection matter, the DA is also concerned about the targeting of car wash businesses. “Our view is that car wash businesses are just a drop in the ocean compared to the thousands of residents who continue to receive municipal services for free. The most problematic part about this whole thing is that most of the residents who are currently not paying can actually afford to pay, but are not doing so because they know that the municipality is unlikely to take any action against them,” he said.