There is a move afoot to try and stop Msunduzi from appointing the new municipal manager, Madoda Khathide. A groundswell of opposition is mobilising to make their voices heard. The Msunduzi Property Owners Association (M–POA) is rallying property owners in the city to get together to oppose the recent appointment of the new municipal manager. Mano Naidoo of the M-POA said they will soon be established as a Section 21 company. “The role of this company will be to represent property owners in addressing all their service delivery issues.” He said Msunduzi has failed to ensure clean governance and departments within the control of the Msunduzi Municipality are dysfunctional. Naidoo said the M-POA seeks a mandate from commercial property owners to oppose the recent appointment of a municipal manager. “We believe that the appointee is not a suitable candidate for the top job as CEO of Msunduzi. Our city cannot afford to find out in the next 12 months that we are in a deeper hole than we are in currently.” He said Msunduzi’s appointment of the new city boss was done behind closed doors and did not include the opposition parties. “This was flawed and the interview was not carried out through a democratic process. The opposition parties were appointed through a democratic process and are the representatives of the citizens of Pietermaritzburg,” said Naidoo. The M–POA will demand that the municipal manager appointed to run the Msunduzi Municipality as its CEO is suitably qualified and has a track record in running a municipality of a similar size to Msunduzi. They want the results of the interview and the scoring of the top three candidates. They also want a review of the appointment of the new municipal manager so that it’s done in a transparent, inclusive public process, and they want the “flawed and inconsistent rates valuation roll” to be suspended with immediate effect. “The M-POA will thereafter engage with property owners and the municipality to demand better service delivery in Msunduzi. We have the support of various individuals, NGOs and civic bodies, including industries. “As property owners we will demand that as major contributors to the rates base, we demand to have a say in who our municipal manager/CEO is,” he said. Naidoo is the former chairperson of the uMngeni residents and ratepayers association. “We successfully challenged the flawed and inconsistent rates valuation. This resulted in the uMngeni municipal area being revalued. The result was that the revalue brought in R386 million into the uMngeni rates base. This was done through strong team work.” Anthony Waldhausen, of the Msunduzi Association of Residents and Ratepayers (MARR), said they were approached by the M-POA to request support for the review of the recent appointment of the municipal manager. “We therefore support M-POA’s call for the review of the appointment of the municipal manager as the due process by the council was not fully transparent and lacked accountability. “The fact that opposition parties were not part of the selection process is flawed and does not respect the residents and ratepayers. This appointment was a deployed appointment and we want to know the selection process and if the post was advertised and what were the criteria in appointing Mododa Khathide. “We are concerned that he has been MM of the eDumbe Municipality, which is a tiny rural local municipality in Zululand, formerly Paulpietersburg, and this would hardly be suitable experience to run a large, complex and compromised urban municipality like ours,” Waldhausen said. He said MARR will also be writing to the municipality on this issue to get answers and to make a call to set aside the appointment of the municipal manager. Kantha Naidoo, chairperson of Msunduzi Economic Development Association (Meda), which represents businesses down town, said: “Whilst the country and world at large are facing this crisis we cannot ignore that prior to this Msunduzi Municipality themselves are in crisis. “We are hearing of the appointment of a new municipal manager, however, we ask ourselves why council keeps repeating the same mistakes that get them in this situation in the first place. “By this I mean why are they not being open and transparent about how he was selected, how was the position advertised,if at all; who were the other candidates; what is their experience especially with respect to a municipality as big as ours and under administration to add to matters.” Kantha Naidoo said Meda’s concern is that failure by council to do all of the above may result in history repeating itself. “In the end we the people of Msunduzi will be the casualties of such failure; yet they being the very people that have a fiduciary duty to protect us do not consult us and hence fail us repeatedly.” The Witness reported in February that Khathide was leaving Ladysmith’s Alfred Duma Municipality to head the capital city. Mayor Mzimkhulu Thebolla said at the time that the council has every confidence in Khathide’s capabilities and is looking forward to working with him to provide stability, fast track service delivery, stimulate job creation and stop corruption. Msunduzi Municipality was asked to respond, but no response was received.