It’s something most parents dread — having “The Talk” about
the “birds and the bees” with their children. It’s hardly surprising then that many parents still prefer
that their children learn “the facts of life” from their teachers at school. But parents have cried foul after various reports claiming
that the Department of Basic Education has plans to introduce a controversial
Comprehensive Sexuality Education (CSE) or “sex education” subject into the
Grade 4 to Grade 12 curriculum. Graphic and explicit pictures are being circulated on
different social media platforms purporting to be taken from the department’s
new textbooks. One of the images shows adults in bed with graphic details.
Others claim the department would distribute condoms with stationery this year. OUTRAGE BY PARENTS Many parents expressed outrage regarding the content,
calling for it to be scrapped. Even the Zulu King, Goodwill Zwelithini, said
plans to introduce this subject to Grade 4 pupils was an insult to parents and
children. Speaking at the Battle of Isandlwana commemoration in Nquthu
late last month, Zwelithini said this “will sexualise our children by teaching
them how to have sex, rather than the consequences and responsibilities of
sex”. Commenting on The Witness Facebook page, Shay Gounden said
from what she’s seen in the books posted on social media, “it’s not
acceptable”. “I’m an educator as well in the private sector. No one from
the department has enlightened us on this CSE. And furthermore, I will not
allow my staff to teach this,” she said. Melisha Lowe said it was “most definitely our responsibility
as parents to teach our kids about it. I just don’t think it’s appropriate to
teach 11-year-old kids about wet dreams.” Prea Naidoo said: “It’s just insane! Yes, teaching your kids
to be aware of themselves and their bodies is vital. I don’t mind talks about
puberty. But for heaven’s sake why sex education? “You’re just highlighting an already very aware younger
generation. I feel as time is going, more and more opportunities to parent our
children are being snatched away from us parents and given to the hands of the
government … “We can’t discipline our kids, we can’t teach our kids age
appropriate lessons because now it’s all up to the government. What else would
the government like to teach our kids? How to capture the state 101?” ‘IT’S FAKE NEWS’ Commenting on the matter, the national Department of Basic
Education (DBE) said this was fake news. In a statement, the department said they were concerned
about the impact this had on the debate around the issue of the Comprehensive
Sexuality Education (CSE) section of the Life Orientation Curriculum, saying it
was causing confusion and anxiety among parents. The department’s spokesperson, Elijah Mhlanga, distanced the
department from a series of images which were circulating on social media. “These images are not part of the books produced by the
department. Members of the public have been contacting the department about
videos with incorrect information that have also been distributed on social
media,” said Mhlanga. “These social media posts have misled the public and created
unnecessary anxiety and anger especially among parents. Social media has been
an integral part of the fake news campaign against the department regarding the
issue of the Comprehensive Sexuality,” he said. The department accused a “lobby group” of creating
misleading social media posts and feeding the public “contaminated
information”. “The purpose of CSE is to address sexual abuse, HIV
infections, learner pregnancy, and bullying and peer pressure and help learners
stay in school until they complete Grade 12,” said Mhlanga. The department warned that there is a difference between
what is on the Internet and social media and what is contained in the books the
department uses. Mhlanga urged those concerned to verify with the department
before making decisions based on information published by certain organisations
and individuals. The department added that the CSE was introduced in 2000
within the subjects of life orientation and life skills to ensure that pupils
do not get confusing and misleading messages on sex, sexuality, gender and
relationships. CSE has thus been part of the South African curriculum for
almost 20 years. They have, however, implemented a “new curriculum” in 2020,
said the department. It was a pilot project across five provinces affecting
1 500 schools where “consultation has taken place”. The department emphasised that CSE is not sex education,
does not teach pupils how to have sex, does not sexualise children and does not
only focus on only the physical relationships between humans. Daniela Ellerbeck, an attorney with Freedom of Religion SA,
said in July last year they had written to the department demanding it disclose
at the beginning of each year the content that would be taught during sex
education lessons. The Family Policy Institute, supported by seven church
groups, also called for the scrapping of the CSE programme. ADVICE ON HOW TO HAVE ‘THE TALK’ Christy Herselman, the founder of The Chat organisation, a
speaker, a researcher and an author, said it was hard for her to comment about
the CSE as she hasn’t seen any lesson plans but said from what she understands,
the matter was still in the discussion and workshop phases. She did, however, emphasise the importance of parents having
the much-dreaded sex talk with their children whether or not their teachers
speak to them about it at school. “We can’t rely on teachers to do this job for us because as
parents we are perfectly positioned in our children’s lives to have ongoing
conversations about sexuality. “We need to create a safe environment in our homes where our
children get accurate information about sexuality because there is already so
much information on social media and songs. “It’s our responsibly and privilege to impart ongoing age
appropriate information to our children,” she said. Herselman said schools can supplement what parents tell
their children but also raised concerns about the different religious beliefs,
different backgrounds and different value systems of each individual child. “What we teach our children about sexuality at home will
differ from family to family, which makes it very difficult for the schools
because they will have one viewpoint on sexuality and that might not be the
same as every family’s views. “That’s why it’s important for parents to have open and
honest conversations with our children as children are very curious. “Often as parents we shy away from this topic because our
parents didn’t have these conversations with us but because the culture we live
in today is a highly sexualised culture, you just have do it.” She said if parents choose not to talk about sexuality to
their children, they will end up getting the information somewhere else, worst
case scenario, pornography. She said the average age when a child sees
pornography for the first time is 11 years old. “We can’t allow that to be the sex education class for our
children. We want them to have a beautiful healthy version of sexuality before
they are exposed to the ugly side of sexuality and as parents that’s our
responsibility and not the school’s responsibility.” She said the question of whether the talk should be done at
school or by parents is a debatable issue because some children are not told
about these things at home and can benefit greatly from it being addressed at
school. Herselman said the easiest way parents can initiate these
conversations with their children is from a young age and in a natural way.
“Always refer to their private parts as precious and private. Even from an age
of about three years old, start saying ‘your private parts are private, no one
is allowed to touch them’. You start having simple conversation and from there
move on to more complex topics as they grow old.” She said research shows that the perfect window to have the
more serious talk is ages seven to nine as when children get to teenage years,
they become more awkward and are afraid to ask questions openly. “Some of the fears most parents come to me with is that they
don’t want to take away the innocence of their child but what they must
understand is that it actually protecting them so that when they are exposed to
these things on the Internet, they have the healthy version of the topic.”