Tired of being abused by her policeman husband, a South Coast woman took the law into her own hands and paid a traditional healer R2 000 to have him killed. Nonkululeko Ngwabe on Wednesday confessed all to the Pietermaritzburg high court and will be sentenced on Monday. The 44-year-old woman had Thulani Ngwabe killed on November 2, last year. She said that she and her husband had a tumultuous relationship where he would physically and emotionally abuse her. He used to get jealous and then chase her with a knife or his police firearm. “I would call the police for assistance and then he would show remorse and I remained with him”. In 1999 they separated. However, her husband convinced her to return for the sake of their disabled child, who died in 2017. When she fell pregnant the physical and emotional abuse started again because he did not believe it was his child. Ngwabe added that she wanted him to go with her to a traditional healer to get help for his anger issues but he refused. She went by herself and the healer gave her a “powder substance” to put in her husband’s food so that he would not hurt her. Despite this, he continued to hit her. She returned to the traditional healer and informed him that the physical abuse had gotten worse. The healer told her if nothing worked he would give her something that would cause her husband’s death. He gave her some more powder, which she put in her husband’s food, but it had no effect on him. Once again she returned to the healer and told him that the powder was not working. The healer told her that he knew some “boys” who would assist in killing her husband and she agreed to this. On the day of the killing she and her husband went to a tavern and he got drunk. They both then went to the beach at Port Shepstone. She told the healer where they were and he and two men arrived. Alcohol was consumed, she said. The traditional healer then left and she took a taxi home. She later paid the healer R2 000 after he told her that the boys had stabbed her husband and he had died