A family of three were viciously attacked by an axe-wielding intruder in their Oribi home on Tuesday night in an attack many believe could have been an attempt to steal their house. Abie-Walter Smith (85), his partner Rita Westpfaha (75) and her special-needs daughter Carol Westpfaha (56) were each hit on the head by an axe when the intruder entered their home at about 7.30 pm. Smith is in the intensive care unit at a local hospital while the mother and daughter were discharged early yesterday morning. Smith and Rita were both struck once on the head, while Carol was hit twice on the back of her head. The three have been staying at the house, which is owned by Rita, for over 20 years. They were rescued from the attack after Rita managed to run outside and scream for help and the neighbours ran to their aid. The axeman fled on foot and disappeared into the nearby shrubbery. No arrests have been made. A police source said he had heard that there is trouble with housing in the area and residents were often intimidated by whoonga addicts. When The Witness visited the house on Wednesday morning, family members were cleaning blood stains on the floor tiles and scatter cushions. Odette Krauser, a relative, said they suspect that the break-in was intended to scare the family to move out of their house so the attacker could move in. Krauser said the unknown man entered the house apparently through an open back door. “The man startled my aunt Rita, who was in the kitchen, by apparently tackling her. She fell on the floor and asked him what he wanted, he told her to keep quiet and hit her on the head with the axe,” she said. Smith, who had been relaxing in the lounge, was also struck with the axe on his head after trying to defend Rita. “He started hitting my uncle and when Carol, who was sleeping in her room, heard the commotion and went to check what was happening, he hit her twice.” Krauser said the family suspected that the burglary was a “scare tactic” to hijack their home. “He didn’t ask for anything, he just started attacking but we know this to be their modus operandi. The whoonga boys have been terrorising residents to drive them out of this area so they can take over their properties. “You don’t get threats. You just get hit. This man must have been watching this house to know that it is occupied by vulnerable people. “The whoonga is rife here and it is destroying the whole village. The addicts throw you out and sell the house so that they have money to feed their addiction. “The police don’t do anything; we need a strong police presence in this area,” Krauser said. According to residents, last month two other elderly people were forced out of their property by men who used the same modus operandi. In 2015, The Witness reported that Susan and Melvin Lawson were found murdered in their home in Oribi after an attempt to steal their house. Last year, disgruntled Oribi residents staged a protest over the slow pace of housing delivery in the area