There wasn’t much foot traffic in the Pietermaritzburg CBD on Wednesday, and vendors were sparsely positioned along Church Street, Chief Albert Luthuli Street and Pietermaritz Street. The Witness spoke to fruit vendors during lunch time, who said business has been bad. Ayesha Snoya said she noticed a drop on Monday, when she only made R150 from selling her fruit and snacks. She said she suspects it’s because of President Cyril Ramaphosa’s address on Sunday. The president advised citizens to practice social distancing. “On a good day, I make almost R800 because I have regular customers who buy my product in bulk. I was shocked when I went home with just over R150,” she said sadly. Snoya said she understood the health risk of continuing to sell her fruit, but this was her source of income. She added that she had incidents this week where she would approach someone passing by and they would say: “‘No, no my sister, I will get sick!’ It’s not easy. I have mouths to feed’,” said Snoya. This was echoed by another vendor, Misheck Bhanda, who on Wednesday said his biggest concern was that he could not tell who had the virus and who was healthy.   Misheck Bhanda sells fresh fruit, sweets and cigarettes on Pietermaritz Street. Bhanda said he was concerned because Covid-19 has no face to it, so having people touch his fruits and not buying them frustrated him.  Bhanda said he’s always been frustrated by customers who touch all the fruits to check how fresh they are; but because of Covid-19 his concern had heightened. “I wash the fruit as often as I can throughout the day, but you know there are people who don’t clean their hands — then they play ‘morabaraba’ with my stock when they can’t decide what to buy,” said a peeved Bhanda. A woman who sells fresh boerewors rolls, Lindiwe Dumakude, said Covid-19 had not affected her business yet but she was getting more anxious about this every day. She said she was stuck between choosing her health and putting food on the table. “It’s still early, but I am worried. I foresee this virus affecting me one way or another,” she said. Dumakude said she could not afford to buy hand sanitisers so she brings her Sunlight dishwashing liquid from home and offers her customers a squirt before she hands them their food. “I hope this soap is just as effective. Sanitisers are so expensive, and they don’t last,” she said. The owner of a fast-food takeaway shop, Paulos Abuca, told The Witness that he didn’t believe in Covid-19, and he was exercising his faith during this time. When asked about what he was doing to protect customers regardless of his own beliefs, Abuca pointed at a large bottle of hand sanitiser at the till. He added that his employees, who made the food, always wore gloves and there were hand wipes in place for customers to use. “My business has not been affected by this virus, and I don’t think it will. God will protect us,” said Abuca.