DOCTORS and nurses are going into airplanes coming from risky areas to do temperature checks on every passenger, and are looking out for anyone who appears to be sick. Health Minister Zweli Mkhize also said on Sunday that passengers who have fever, are coughing or even are jet lagged are taken out for further examination. The walls and floors at the airports are also being disinfected. He was addressing residents who came to the Pietermaritzburg City Hall for a public Covid-19 briefing. Mkhize enlightened the audience about coronavirus and where it originated. He also spoke about the first man infected in KwaZulu-Natal and how he was doing. The man’s wife has also tested positive for coronavirus but his children are negative. Nonetheless, because of the incubation period, the children are still under quarantine and will be re-tested at a later stage. There was a short question and answer session after Mkhize’s address. A woman asked for clarity about what animals carry the virus. She wanted to know if she should be worried about children playing with domesticated animals. Mkhize spoke about an incident in China where an owner and his dog have the virus but he said it was not clear who gave the virus to who. Another question was how public transport commuters can ensure that they are safe from the virus, considering the nature of taxis and how congested they are. Mkhize reiterated the importance of practising good hygiene such as washing hands regularly with soap and water. A pastor asked the minister to release a circular for pastors to give to church members, in light of the upcoming Easter services which people attend in large numbers. The circular should reassure church members that going to church and church camps is safe. He also suggested it highlight the precautions that should be taken. Mkhize replied he will arrange for something to be released. He advised that if someone is very ill, they should rather stay at home just as they would with any illness to minimise risks. KZN Health MEC Nomagugu Simelane-Zulu said that from Monday, there will be various awareness campaigns throughout the province. “We will be talking on local radio stations, newspapers etc.,” she said. Responding to media questions, Mkhize said there are some single wards at Grey’s Hospital — which is one of the hospitals identified to treat coronavirus patients — that can be used to accommodate any patients. If patients display the same condition and there is no risk of cross infection, then they will be kept together. Also, the staff are well trained and are in protective gear. He said that once a patient tests negative for the virus, he or she is no longer under any further quarantine. Mkhize said that the outstanding test results of the 18 people who came into contact with the Hilton man will be released in 48 hours. Asked about the worldwide concern over the virus, he said the fact that it is new is causing the fright. “If you were to compare this virus and influenza then influenza tends to kill a lot more people … we need to understand how this new virus manifests itself what we can do to defeat it and how to make sure people understand that with time it will be a virus that is part of our lives.”