An ice-cream shop that did not have electricity for six days is claiming almost R1 million in damages from Msunduzi Municipality because all its stock melted. The application, brought by Kulfi Polar Ice Cream in Langalibalele Street, came before the Pietermaritzburg high court on Tuesday and was adjourned. The ice-cream shop sells large quantities of ice-cream to the public, retailers and wholesalers, said the court papers. On December 23, 2016, the shop’s electricity supply was interrupted by a power surge which only affected part of the CBD. The claim said that the manager immediately contacted the municipality’s call centre advising them that there is no electricity supply to the premises, and asking when the power would be restored as all the ice-cream would melt. The manager was informed that the City electricians were busy attending to the problem and was given a reference number. He was further informed that the supply would be restored “shortly”. Throughout the day, the manager inquired with the municipality when the electricity would come back on, but was not given a definite answer. The outage lasted six days, until December 28. This caused the cold room refrigerators as well as other electric storages to defrost. The shop was forced to turn customers away as the ice cream melted and became watery. The packaging got damaged and the ice-cream could not be sold. The claim added that the municipality could have taken steps to prevent the economic loss by restoring the electricity supply quickly. Because this did not happen, the business suffered damages and huge losses. Also, it lost clientele, profits and was unable to supply stock to customers which gave the shop a bad name as an ice-cream supplier, especially since this happened during the peak season. The claim said that the municipality is liable to pay damages because it failed to maintain a constant supply of electricity. The loss was as a result of the municipality’s negligence by not providing or supplying electricity timeously to the ice-cream shop. Ebrahiem Ball, the regional manager of the ice-cream shop, said in court papers that he visited the shop on December 28. “There was a fair quantity of damaged stock. The freezer room has a total capacity of plus minus R1,2 million. The shop was fully stocked for Christmas,” he said. Ball said that the freezer rooms and freezers were checked and found to be in good working order. The damage was caused by the lack of electricity supply. He also confirmed the amount of the damages suffered.