A Howick businesswoman has dispelled rumours that she has tested positive for Covid-19 amid panic after rumours spread at the weekend. Hairdresser Lauren Holland of Headspace Hair Artistry took to Facebook on Sunday to dismiss the rumour as “fake news”. She has temporarily closed the business and says the unfounded reports have had a negative impact. Holland noted that one of her clients had tested positive for the virus. “All the information regarding what has happened at the hair salon is incorrect,” Holland said. “This is also unfair on my client. There is no need to panic. She is absolutely fine, and her parents have tested negative. We have been so sanitary, and I’m a 110% sure that we are all fine. I’m doing my part, and this sense of panic is the last thing we need. There is nothing to be afraid of.” She said all the clients she had been in contact with, have also presented themselves to get tested. “I have cancelled all my clients for the next two weeks and I’m staying in isolation. We need to stay calm and I cannot stress that enough. I’m not positive for Covid-19.” Holland urged residents in Howick to ensure that they only share information from credible sources. “Please consider source, validity, accuracy, necessity and most importantly who it affects before every story, post or picture you share,” she added. Meanwhile, a South Coast man, Johan Kinsey-Ahlers, has confirmed that he has tested positive for Covid-19. In a statement posted by South Coast Volkswagen on Saturday, Kinsey-Ahlers, who travelled to Germany for a business event in February, said: “Firstly, I feel terrible for the way this is impacting so many around me — my family, friends, colleagues, clients, and many others whom I have had contact with in the past three weeks since February 29.” Kinsey-Ahlers said he travelled to Munich on February 25 and returned to South Africa on February 29. “At the time very, few cases had been reported in Germany and there were no travel restrictions in place. I was scanned at the airport on my return and was given the all clear.” The dealer principal at VW said he has had no symptoms in the past three weeks. Following a public appeal for people who had travelled abroad to go and get tested, Kinsey-Ahlers said he was tested on March 16. “I was only informed late on Friday, March 20 that I had tested positive,” he said. “We have been following the prescribed hygiene protocols in all of our business premises since they were first announced. Our staff has also been properly trained on personal hygiene, social distancing and correct customer interaction. “We also immediately imposed a lockdown on our business premises and staff after the news broke on Friday. We have partnered with a local doctor, who is an expert in this field, to implement a ‘disaster management plan’ and we are complying with all his instructions and protocols at this time and assisting in any way we can. “I believe that it was only a matter of time before this reached our community, but I feel terrible that I have brought it to our doorsteps,” Kinsey-Ahlers said. Meanwhile, a Newcastle woman has reportedly also tested positive for Covid-19 at a private facility. This has yet to be confirmed by the state. The Newcastle Advertiser  reported on Sunday that the woman is self-isolating at home. It is alleged in the article that she fell ill while on a cruise with her husband last week, developing a sore throat and a slight cough. The woman’s husband is said to have tested negative for the virus.