Security guards and access control systems have been introduced at the New England Road landfill site to prevent uncontrolled access and dumping. These are some of the measures put in place by Msunduzi Municipality to fulfil a revised compliance notice that was issued by the Department of Economic Development, Tourism and Environmental Affairs on February 18. This is in light of the continuous problems at the landfill site. Mbongeni Mathe, the municipality’s acting general manager of community services, gave a presentation on Msunduzi’s plan to address the landfill site in the City. It took place on Thursday at Chamber House. His presentation was in the form of a table — listing the description of what had to be done, the proposed action, timelines, its current status and comments. Mathe said the municipality has appointed local company Surg Sut to manage and direct the turnaround strategy at the site. The company in turn has appointed civil engineer Mageshan Govender to oversee and manage the daily functioning of the site and report weekly in writing on the progress of the turning around operation at the site. Mathe said that all waste disposed at the site has to be covered and compacted daily with a maximum of 150 mm of soil or other material approved by the licensing authourity. Cover material needs to be procured, the landfill site needs to be surveyed and filling plans need to be developed. The municipality has written to the department requesting an extension of time to do this. Emzansi Engineers and Leomat have been appointed to repair and maintain the landfill access roads in a condition that ensures unimpeded access to the landfill site for vehicles transporting waste and to ensure that the roads are kept free of waste. This is in progress. Surge Sut has to ensure that all waste brought for disposal is done within the disposal area approved in terms of the waste licence. He added that the company has to provide an action plan for the immediate removal of the waste along the access roads and open areas outside the approved and lined waste disposal area. A letter has also been written to the department asking for an extension to do this. Mathe said the municipality has already demarcated an area for the recycling of waste to take place. The waste first needs to be cleared there. The supply chain management still has to procure the necessary consultant and contractor to refurbish the site. Emzansi has also been appointed to develop a decommissioning and rehabilitation plan for the landfill site and to develop a written submission outlining the municipality’s plans towards decommissioning and rehabilitating the site. It should note limitations of the current site in the medium to long term and identify an alternate landfill site. Once the plan has been approved it will be implemented.