The elderly and disabled converged on social grant pay points around Pietermaritzburg in unusually high numbers on Monday to beat the pay-out rush, and huddled in endless queues throughout the day. Keeping the recommended distance because of Covid-19 was not on the list of the day’s priorities, which were headed by cash and food that had to be bought. The Sassa beneficiaries, who usually get paid after the 1st of the month, were this month paid earlier as the Social Development Department was concerned that delaying the payments would bring more suffering as many beneficiaries were struggling to cope with lockdown regulations restricting them to their homes. At the Edendale Mall, security guards prevented vehicles from entering the parking lot after the beneficiaries crowded it as they rushed to withdraw their grants. Thandiwe Majola, the mother of a six-month-old baby, held her child tight amid the pushing and shoving. “I arrived here at 6 am and it’s 12 o’clock now but there seems to be no movement. There are just too many people and I’m now beginning to wonder whether I will be able to get my grant. “I desperately need the cash as I have run out milk for the baby. I know what I did is not right as the baby can easily get infected with this coronavirus thing. But there is no one I can leave my baby with,” she said. The congestion at Edendale Mall was so bad that Msunduzi Mayor Mzi Thebolla had to be summoned. Thebolla, who was accompanied by Msunduzi Speaker Eunice Majola, used a loud hailer in an attempt to persuade the crowd to comply with the lockdown regulations, which require people to keep a one-metre distance when queuing. “I know that many of you who are here need the money to buy food and other necessities. But I would like to also make you aware that we are currently dealing with a disease that spreads very fast when people are gathered in the manner in which you are. “Yes, we want you to get your money but what we don’t want is for you to end up being infected,” he said. Elsewhere around the city, exasperation was written all over people’s faces, some of whom walked long distances to pay points as few minibus taxis were on the road. At the Mayor’s Walk Spar, Thuba Nxumalo, who receives a disability grant after being injured in a freak accident 10 years ago, spent several hours in the queue. “As you can see my other hand is not functioning and I also have a limp. However, because I need the money for food, I had to walk all the way from Mpumuza because all the taxis coming to town were full. “Yes, it would have been a good idea for me to have waited, maybe until Wednesday, to allow this commotion to subside but my main worry is that there would be no food left at the shops by then as people are already buying in large quantities,” he said. At the post offices, which are pay points of choice, queues were also extremely long. Nonhlanhla Hlongwa, an old-age pensioner from Sweetwaters, said a neighbour rescued her by giving her a lift after she could not get into a minibus taxi. “There were very few taxis and most of them were taking in only seven to eight people as the drivers were scared they would be arrested if they took a full load. “I was lucky because after standing in the queue for about four hours I eventually managed to withdraw my money. I’m worried about the people I left behind in the queue as some of them were disabled people,’’ she said. KZN Social Development MEC Nonhlanhla Khoza blamed the long queues on “panic”, saying some beneficiaries believed some pay points could run out of cash due to the lockdown. “As a result there was overcrowding in some pay points and some people failed to adhere to social distancing requirements,” said her spokesperson, Mhlaba Memela. However, Memela said the MEC was impressed with the manner in which the queues were managed in some parts of the province. “She spent the day visiting pay points in the South Coast with Premier Sihle Zikalala. “In some pay points, particularly in post offices, peopled adhered to social distancing requirements.” The Howick branch of Sassa in Somme Street was closed to the public on Monday and the elderly and disabled were directed a short distance away to the Howick Post Office where a lucky few managed to find a seat while the rest stood in resigned silence in a long queue waiting to access their money. Although Sassa officials were present, no attempt was being made to encourage people to keep their distance. Asked why they weren’t using the office, a Sassa staff member said they did not have the necessary equipment to make payments. At Howick’s Absa, FNB, Standard Bank and Capitec branches, and standalone ATMs in the taxi rank area and shopping centres, there were also long queues of people waiting to withdraw their grants. Bank staff were on hand with sanitiser, but there was very little social distancing being practised. Hundreds of people also lined up outside Save Supermarket, Pick n Pay Family, Boxer, butcheries and pharmacies in the Howick CBD for their chance to buy food. All the stores were limiting shopper numbers and spraying people’s hands with sanitiser as they went through the doors. Police vehicles were spotted around Howick, on the R103 to Piggly Wiggly, and out towards Mpophomeni. No police or soldiers were on hand to help with the crowds of people in the town. “