Hands up. (No, no, relax. I’m not robbing you.) I just want to see who
else is feeling the punishing pinch of the contracting value of the rand? Oh, okay, I see you. Thank goodness I’m not alone. I hoped
it wasn’t just me. Now I see it’s practically all of us. In other news this week, we heard that our country has
slipped into a recession. The double whammy of load shedding and the drought
have understandably taken their toll and as a country we’re officially
financially unwell. Last Saturday, I headed for the shops to get a few things.
Number one on my  list was ... wait for
it ... hand sanitiser. You see, we all had the same idea. I had time on my hands for a change, so I did a careful
shop, comparing prices and weighing up brands, quality and value options. I forewent expensive clothes washing liquid for a cheaper
brand, but chose a better toothpaste over the cheaper one I usually get (she
said, hopefully scoring brownie points with her dentist if he’s reading this,
and yes doc, I am flossing ...). I bought the bare minimum of what I needed. I opted for
supermarket grade fruit and veg and my only luxury in that regard was two
dragon fruit, which I love, but can’t often get. But at 20 bucks for two they
were hardly a major extravagance. There were no other frills in my trolley. I
know all about temptation and clever marketing so I stuck to my list and didn’t
venture down the aisles I had no business being in. I didn’t want to know what
new breakfast cereals were on offer. (We’ll stick to good old-fashioned and
relatively cheap oats, thanks.) I pushed my trolley faster past the chips and sweets aisle.
(My figure will thank me later.) I skirted away from the general toiletries
aisle. (I’ll use the dregs of my deos, face wash and shampoos before I get more
in. I’ll use my stash of luxury gift soaps that I slip between my folded
clothes to make them smell nice. That’ll save a few rands but my clothes won’t
exude the fragrance of lilac longing or lingering lavender. I’ll live with it.) I went to that more upmarket shop only for free-range
chicken (for the guy) and eggs. Theirs are the best shop-bought variety and I
won’t compromise on free range. But, the combined total for these two grocery bills, about
six or seven bags worth, was a wallet-crushing R1 650. I went grey around the
gills when the final amount was tallied. There really didn’t seem to be much
there. As I left the supermarket, an elderly woman was walking out
too. “Now to unpack this lot,” she said. ‘It’s always such a job,
isn’t it?” I agreed, thinking of the flight of stairs I have to
negotiate with my bulging bags when I get home and the schlep of making space
in the cupboards and fridge, and washing the fruit and veg. I also cautiously remarked to her how expensive everything
seemed to be and she agreed immediately, so we had a quick chat about that as
we headed to the parking. It hit home to me how most of us are shell-shocked by
the price of groceries and how they insidiously creep up and up. The problem is that salaries mostly don’t keep up (maybe
especially in Maritzburg?). And I feel for the pensioners who must be having a really
tough time of it. I’ve cut down on many things we took for granted before,
like a meal out once a week and a weekend away every month or two. We just
can’t do it anymore and be responsible about saving for retirement and meeting
the demands of our monthly budget. So we economise where we can. I’ve cut back on
luxuries, visits to the hairdresser and spending on clothes and shoes. It can
be done. I’ve got two pairs of sandals at the moment which have
garnered more compliments than any shoes I’ve ever owned. Even the owner of a
shoe shop in the city remarked on them. They’re sparkly and very pretty and
have worn well.  They cost around 90
bucks a pair. Cheap as chips and from a shop many people turn their noses up
at. But I refuse to be a snob when their sandals are this cute. And, has anyone else noticed their monthly expenses inching
up? Municipal accounts and that dratted MCB charge, etc., the security company,
medical aid and associated costs, insurance, petrol over the long term, and the
odd eventualities, like car and motorbike services. We’re lucky to get a
discounted satellite TV price. We’ve got to the age where our egos allow us to
drive older cars, which were paid off ages ago. We pack our work lunches and
don’t eat fast food. We fix things — luckily the guy is brilliant that
way — rather than pay for repairs, where we can. I’ve stopped buying stuff that
just makes me happy, like gorgeous but trivial trinkets from antique shops (I
really do have enough, she said, trying to convince herself) or renewing home
décor frequently. I’m eternally grateful I get my books for free in exchange
for reviewing them. I wonder how people manage with the prices associated with
having children now. To those  who have
it all wrapped up and still manage to save a little for their child’s future
education, I bow to you. So, as we all accept we have to tighten our belts a little
more as the economy shrinks, let’s have a group hug and try keep our chins up. We’ll take our pleasure in day trips, rather than weekends
away and maybe go out for breakfast, instead of supper. (The meals are a lot
cheaper and we don’t need that lovely bottle of wine at 8 am. Bonus!) By the
way, on my shopping mission I forgot to get the hand sanitiser after all. Oh,
budget blues be bolloxed. Covid-19 too. We’ll have a great weekend anyway. 