“I waited years
before I spoke a word about my sexual assault”. Last September, after 32 years, Angelique McAdam took the
daunting decision of finally opening a rape case against the perpetrator. Two weeks ago, the country woke up to a screaming newspaper
headline: “[He] raped me”. The accusation by singer Lady Zamar came just as the
pictures and videos of the accused’s highly successful concert in Durban were
trending on social media. A case has been opened and the National Prosecuting
Authority is deciding whether to prosecute or not. Many people have asked on social media why Lady Zamar is
opening a case years after the fact. But how late is too late to report a rape case? In 2018, in a victory for victims of sexual abuse, the
Constitutional Court confirmed the South Gauteng High Court in Johannesburg’s
ruling that lifted a 20-year “expiry date” on prosecuting sexual offences. The court said that the “accused’s right to a fair trial
would not be more prejudiced by prosecuting sexual offences after 20 years than
his or her rights in a prosecution of rape or compelled rape after 20 years”. So why did McAdam wait so long to report her perpetrator? She told Weekend Witness that the incident happened in 1987
when she was 14. “In 1987 a woman had no voice and a young girl of 14 had no
voice. Where do you go? Who was going to believe you? My own father didn’t
believe me. I blamed myself for it. Statically it takes about 17 to 18 years
for most rape victims to come out.” McAdam said at the time, there was no clear indication where
she could get help as a rape victim. “It is fear of secondary victimisation. You feel dirty and
guilty. You battle with guilt and the stigma. The mindset of people is
different, some will believe you and some won’t. You blame yourself all your
life,” she said. McAdam was allegedly raped by a former employer. Criminal law expert Professor James Grant said victims
should know that if there is any delay in reporting a case, it is not going to
be held against them. “The delay should not keep people from coming forward … But
on the other hand, going through any rape case is horrible. We know the system
is not victim sensitive.” He also stressed that complainants should never be concerned
that too much time passed before a case was made, although he admitted that the
difficulty in rape cases was evidence and cases need to be proved beyond
reasonable doubt. An experienced prosecutor who has dealt with a lot of rape
cases said that rape should preferably be reported straight away so that DNA
evidence can be obtained. However, she reiterated that here is no time frame for when
a rape case can be reported.