Living at Ground Zero is different from what I had imagined. I picked up a hitchhiker on the South Coast on Saturday and when I told him I was heading home to Hilton, he said: “Oh you’re going to pick up some corona.” He didn’t jump out the car but must have been thinking about it. Then I read a report in a Sunday paper best known for its Rogue Unit fabrications that “All roads leading to the manicured lawns of Hilton, home of the North Face and Land Cruiser brigade, were paved with panic and frustration this week.” I think the residents of Hilton would be delighted to have their roads paved with anything to get rid of the potholes. And for the record, this resident doesn’t own any North Face gear (although I know people who do and they’ve never struck me as morally deficient for it), and my 20-year-old Isuzu would be flattered to be mistaken for a Land Cruiser. My mind does bend trying to reconcile the picture of my ordinary life, which has changed not one bit from last week to this, and the knowledge that in my very village a pandemic has gained a foothold which will lead to many people catching it and some will die. To keep a grip I look at the stats and I heed the advice of sage people like Doctor Robyn Reed. Full disclosure, our whole family have been patients of hers over the years, for the reason that she knows her stuff and doesn’t do bullshit. I never thought, however, that she’d be the shining light of common sense in a wilderness of misinformation as people grapple with the implications of a new virus. Patient Zero could not have made a better choice in getting a check-up from her. Patient Zero: what a moniker to be saddled with. Readers of The Witness may have wondered why we have not named him. Firstly because when we asked him if he’d mind he said he’d rather not. Secondly, if anyone has had the misfortune of reading what the online trolls have to say about him then naming him would expose him to even more vitriol. Being journalists, we do persist and ask him every day whether he’s ready to go public. He says that for the sake of his sanity now’s not the time. Given the willingness to stigmatise him he’s taken the prudent route. He’s had direct contact with the virus and to my mind that’s safer than facing the plague of witch-hunters and rumour mongers out there. I don’t begin to understand people who feel that no day is complete without ladling dollops of bile on others. For this there is no known cure although there is every chance that there will be one for Covid-19. We have been acutely conscious at the paper of the need to be cautious in our coverage of the virus, and have published a lot of what is more public health information than journalism. We would have done this anyway, as we used to do for Aids and have done for a range of health issues from diabetes to mental health. We have noticed the absence of government advertising campaigns regarding coronavirus, and so the ethical responsibility falls to others. Lifebuoy soap took out “public service” adverts in all the Sunday papers, for example. Good for them. Without good information there is panic. The danger of panic is in many ways a greater public menace than the disease because it makes it unmanageable. From the first, then, we tried to stress this. You may have read one of our street posters: “Stay calm and get a flu jab”. It was a snappy summary of advice from the National Institute for Communicable Diseases. The response from the trolls on The Witness Facebook page, all of them overnight experts in virology, epidemiology and disease control, was that we were spreading fake news. Some people can’t be helped. One piece of actual fake news that riled me last week was a clever-dick lawyer who sent out, under his company letterhead, that Patient Zero’s two children had tested positive when that was strictly not true. Their tests were negative but they have now been retested and we await the results. But re-read what I have just written. This fake news was from a lawyer, a profession whose business is evidence and verification, consciously spreading information that had no basis in truth. Some people can’t be helped. So as I walk down the aisles at my Spar (the one that had reputedly been closed down in the coronavirus panic), in my neighbourhood shopping centre (the one that no one was going to anymore because everyone had fled Hilton), talking about this and that and the virus to fellow shoppers (none of whom have been fighting to stock up on loo paper), I see not panic but sensible people getting on with it. Stay calm and carry on may have been degraded as a philosophy of life from being on mugs and bumper stickers, but that old war-time ethic of maintaining a stiff upper lip in the face of adversity has a lot going for it. No doubt panicking is a constitutional right, but we’d all be better off if everyone could just do it in the bedroom and not in public. Let me assure you, Ground Zero looks nothing like Aleppo or a leper colony. Most of its inhabitants keep calm, and carry on.