There have been five separate incidents in Pietermaritzburg
and Hilton since last month where older people have been targeted in house
robberies. These attacks have prompted questions on whether or not
there is a gang operating in the capital city or surrounds that is focusing on
the particularly vulnerable group of society. Dr Johan Burger, a senior researcher at the Institute for
Security Studies, said that older people are seen by criminals as being less
capable of resisting any attempt to take their belongings. “Essentially that’s the thing. They are less vigilant for
various reasons. They are less aware, which adds to their vulnerability,” he
said. Having been told of all the reported incidents in which
older people were the targets, Burger suggested that perhaps a new gang or a
reorganised group of criminals are making this their mission. “They are deliberately targeting elderly people. This is
probably a gang because they are able to operate in various areas around the
city.” He said because the crimes are handled by different police
stations, police officers investigating the specific cases may not be seeing
the attacks as an organised criminal activity. An they may not be giving this
the attention required. “At a higher level there needs to be a sort of task team
approach which involves detectives, crime intelligence and visible policing,”
said Burger. The idea is to take all the cases together across the city
and then look at the total picture. “Crime intelligence will have to zoom in using the various
intelligence gathering methods that include the electronic capabilities they
have and the human intelligence through the information networks, and see if
they can trace the roots of this particular criminal group, be it a gang or a
syndicate. “They need to try to get information or intelligence on the
members of this criminal group/groups. “You need to follow a task-team approach with a team of
detectives to look at those cases where elderly people were targeted so the
members of that team work hand in glove,” he said. There is also a third element. This relates specifically to
raising awareness among elderly people. There are a number of security tips for
elderly people to make them less vulnerable. “Police must work together with elderly people to raise
awareness among them. Police also need to determine if there are any hot-spot
areas and they need to ensure they do targeted policing in these areas,” he
said. Femada Shamam, chief executive of The Association for the
Aged, said these incidents highlight the vulnerability of older people. She called on people to change their attitudes towards older
people and realise that their safety is a joint responsibility. “The first
thing is to know who they are and then to ensure that we’ve put in place some
kind of protective mechanism so they know they will be safe, and that they will
get the help they need. “If there is a community policing forum, they should find
out who the older people are in their community and have a buddy system where
they have somebody who will check up on them,” said Shamam. Police spokesperson Sergeant Mthokozisi Ngobese said he does
not think the attacks are related to a gang targeting older people in the
community. “These are isolated cases where the said modus operandi is
used to rob the elderly people in their residential places. Generally all
vulnerable groups are easy targets of criminals,” he said. Ngobese added that the police will intensify their
visibility in the areas where elderly people live. “They must ensure that the doors or burglar doors or
security doors are locked and that windows have burglar guards at all times,”
he said. They must keep their panic buttons in their possession and
phone the police if they suspect something is wrong, he said. He added that
neighbourhood patrols should also be established through CPF structures. SAPS HOME SAFETY TIPS Fences vs walls • A high fence around the house with lockable gates is much
safer than a high wall due to the visibility a fence provides. The primary aim
of the fence is to make access/intrusion difficult and to allow dogs to move
freely around the premises. • Ensure that your gates are locked at all times and that
the keys cannot be reached easily and are not left lying around. • Security gates with sturdy locks in front of each outer
door, as well as burglar proofing covering all windows, are recommended. • The following devices prevent easy access: window bars,
security doors, security gates, razor wire, additional locking devices on
doors, strengthening of doors, peepholes in the doors, safety chains to doors,
and an intercom system between the home and gate. Alarm systems • An alarm system, preferably connected to an armed response
company, can act as an effective deterrent. • In the rural environment a siren or alarm on the roof that
can be heard over a long distance and that can be activated by means of a
switch or panic button in the house, is recommended. • A few switches or panic buttons in several rooms in the
house should be installed. • An alarm must also have the capability to warn the
occupants of any intrusion into the house. Examples of alarm systems:
mechanical and/or electrical (purchased types, improvised systems, threaded tins, threaded pieces of iron, gravel on window
panes, pathways or around the home, and obstacles that can make a noise when
moved). • Biological systems: such as dogs and geese, which will
make a noise when someone is on the property. Security lights • Security lights on the outside of the house improve the
physical protection of a house, farm or smallholding. • The lights must be directed away from the house and must
allow the occupants to use the windows without being observed from outside. • Be aware of shadows and blind spots. Safety precautions • Ensure that all doors are locked at all times, and that
windows are closed when you are not at home. • Large dogs serve as a deterrent. At least one dog should
sleep inside the house. • If you leave your residence, inform your family or
neighbours of your intended destination, time you expect to return and the
route you will be driving, especially if you reside in a rural area. • Ensure that tools such as axes, spades, picks, ladders,
etc. that can be used in an attack, are locked away. • Vary your daily routine. • Get into the habit of not falling asleep immediately after
switching off the lights — remain awake for a while. • You should not be visible in the bedroom from the outside
when asleep. • Always keep a torch nearby at night and when you use it,
ensure that you do not give away your position. • If you are unsure about the security status of your home
after returning from work/a visit, e.g. your dogs do not come to the gate, do
not enter your home. • Contact your neighbour to assist you in securing your
home. • Identify relatively safe places of refuge, for instance:
bathroom, toilet or storeroom. The fewer windows and doors these rooms have,
the better. • Involve employees as they are part of the family team.
Employees must be involved in maintaining security on an equal footing. • Report suspicious behaviour and information to the police. • Clear the areas around the gates of bushes and all
potential hiding places. • Take photographs of all employees. It could be to your
advantage to identify them, if required. • Remunerate your employees when useful information is
provided that contributes to the prevention of crime. • Do not employ casual workers without a reference and keep
copies of all your employees’ identity documents (IDs). • Ensure that you have a good relationship with your
neighbours so that you will be in a good position to support and help each
other. Access and key control • Do not allow strangers on your premises or in your house
without having properly identified the person, especially at night. • Implement proper key controls. • Identify keys by means of codes instead of indicating in
writing on labels which gate or door they open. • Keys to the safe must be kept on the person. • Never hide any keys in places such as in pot plants or
under doormats. • Keys in the keyhole on the inside of the front or back
door should be turned to avoid easy removal. • Never allow strangers to handle keys or look at key
numbers. • Change the locks when keys are lost. • Insert barring devices in door locks. Communication • There should be two systems for alternative back up:
telephone and cellphone. • Have the telephone installed where it is easily accessible
from anywhere in the house. • Inform your children not to give an indication that adult
supervision is not available when they answer the phone. • For more information, go to https://www.saps.gov.za/alert/safety_awareness_home.php TIMELINE OF ATTACKS FEBRUARY 20 Rosemarie (74) and Hugh Patrick (78) were attacked and
robbed in Clarendon at about 12.45 pm. They had just returned from volunteering
at the hospice and were checking their postbox when three men pounced. FEBRUARY 20 Theresa Whiteley (90) had just returned to her Winterskloof
home after shopping with a neighbour when she was attacked. The robbers cut her
fingers in a bid to remove her rings. They also took a plastic bag and put it
over her head to suffocate her, and also tried to throttle her with their
hands. FEBRUARY 20 Ben (83) and Delilah Westcott (82) of Pelham were attacked
after arriving home at about 1.30 pm. They had been shopping and were unpacking
groceries. Delilah was severely assaulted. MARCH 3 James Speedie (86) and his wife Doreen were brutally
attacked in their home during an armed robbery in Hilton. Doreen was home alone having a nap on a couch when the men
accessed the property after breaking a padlock on an exterior gate. They then
removed a glass pane and got into the house. James arrived. The suspects punched, kicked and threw James against a wall
until he fell to the ground. He was dragged out of the house and further
assaulted before the criminals made off with two vehicles. MARCH 6 Three elderly people were attacked in their home in
Hayfields. They were tied up by two suspects who stole items from the house.
They did not want to comment to the media.