Disposable nappies are posing a threat to the environment.
The nappies not only take over landfills and pollute rivers, but they also pose
a health risk if dumped where children or animals could access them. With babies using up to 320 nappies a month, and most
parents opting to use disposable nappies, this is becoming a problem for
everyone as reliable refuse services are not available in many parts of our
province. In the absence of a reliable refuse removal system, many
people have taken to digging a hole and throwing their child’s nappies in. A 24-year-old mother from Umlazi, who asked not to be named,
told Weekend Witness that she disposes of her three-month-old baby’s nappies in
a trench she dug in her backyard. She said the hole is far from her house so
she can get away with covering it up once a week. “It’s in my yard so it
doesn’t bother anybody else,” she said. The mother said this is the only way she can dispose of her
child’s nappies without having to deal with the stench they produce. She said
she pours Jeyes Fluid into the trench and then fills it up with soil. “The
Jeyes Fluid keeps flies away, and also manages the smell of the dirty nappies,”
she said. She said she knows of other families who burn their nappies,
along with sanitary pads. She said many people do this because of the worry
about having their body fluids in “easy reach” of people who may use their
fluids for muthi. Fikile Sukazi told Weekend Witness that she disposes of her
daughter’s dirty nappies in a nappy bin. Sukazi said the nappy bin is “super
helpful”, because each nappy gets wrapped in anti-bacterial film, locking away
any odours and germs. She said that the bin maintains the hygiene in her house
but she doesn’t know what happens to them once they’ve left her home. “The
nappies end up in the municipal trash just like everything else. I have never
given much thought to how they are ‘officially’ disposed of,” she said. But environmentally friendly alternatives may be available.
Founder of Mother Nature Products, Joanne Austin from Cape Town, said they sell
both reusable cloth nappies and “eco-friendly” nappies. Austin said the cloth nappies are better because they are
reusable and are made to last from birth until potty training, which eliminates
the need to buy different sizes. Cloth nappies also reduce the burden of waste
on the environment. She said their disposable nappy liners are made from a wood
pulp so they can tolerate some wetness without breaking up. She said they are a
lot like hygienic wipes, except they are biodegradable and flushable. “The
liners are great because the solid waste ends up in the sewerage system where it
is treated correctly, instead of at a landfill site which is not designed to
contain human waste. When using the cloth nappies, the bio-liners are needed to
‘catch’ the solids, so you don’t have to struggle with cleaning your soiled
nappies,” said Austin. She added that the government needs to be proactive
about educating communities on the benefit of using reusable products. “We need poorer communities to get over the stigma around
reusables because there is a massive cost-saving benefit, along with being healthier
for the baby and planet,” she said. NAPPY FACTS Director of the Cambridge Institute for Sustainability
Leadership of South Africa, Andrew Venter, said nappies are a huge problem,
particularly in communities that are not serviced in South Africa, and
countries all around Africa. Venter said because nappies are non-recyclable and hold
urine and faeces, it makes the nappies a much bigger environmental problem. He
said because nappies are made of plastic materials, when they are dumped into
rivers they slowly erode, releasing micro-plastic and E. coli into the water.
“This is a massive health risk because the reality is, the people who live in
these communities rely on this water for everyday use,” said Venter. 