Police are investigating a charge of intimidation laid against convicted and sentenced businessman Rajivee Soni by his former wife. The charges come after Kerusha Soni obtained a temporary protection order against him in July. Also read: Ex-wife protected from Soni According to the order, he has been warned to stop his “aggressive violent behaviour”, aggressive hooting and opening false charges, for which he has previously been convicted. Soni was sentenced to an effective 30 years’ imprisonment in October 2018 for the murder of his former best friend, Dr Bhavish Sewram. He was granted R400 000 bail by the Supreme Court of Appeal in March pending the outcome of his appeal against his conviction and sentence. The interdict also prevents Soni from committing murder and/or assault. Soni is barred from assaulting or threatening to assault Kerusha or her parents. He has also been ordered not to swear at or insult her or her parents. Neither is he allowed to intimidate them. Soni has also been forbidden from entering her home or workplace. The order also prevents him from watching or following her. In response to the protection order, Soni said in an affidavit that Kerusha makes out no case whatsoever in her affidavit and it should not have been granted. He said that he has been interdicted from committing various acts in respect of her parents. However, he has been advised that no order can be granted in respect of her parents in terms of the Domestic Violence Act. In any event, he said that there is no indication in the legislation that she can bring an application on behalf of her parents. He said that the order is defective in many ways. For instance it said he is not allowed to “watch” her. Watch is far too broad a term to have any meaning, said Soni. Soni disputes all the allegations she makes against him in the interdict application. He said that the purpose of one of the paragraphs in her affidavit is to create the impression that he is a flight risk. Soni said he believes that she is simply trying “maliciously” to prejudice his bail pending his appeal by making “wild, unsubstantiated and irrelevant remarks”. Regarding him not entering her place of residence, he said that he has never forced his way in and has always been let in voluntarily by her or her father. He said that on a proper reading of her affidavit there are no acts of domestic violence set out by her in respect of conduct alleged to have been carried out by him towards her. He said that “stripped of the irrelevant and vexatious allegations”, in her affidavit, it does not establish any acts of domestic violence towards her. Soni added that he is concerned that with the temporary order in place, she will abuse it to have him arrested. The return date for the application is October 7. 