THE mood outside the Newcastle Magistrate’s Court was sombre as a group of protesters calling for farmers’ safety gathered at the gates from early yesterday morning. They were making known their opposition to bail for murder accused Siyabonga Goodman Macu (29). Macu, who is charged with the murder of Glen and Vida Rafferty who were gunned down in their Normandien home last month, was eventually denied bail and remanded in custody until October 29 pending further police investigations, the Newcastle Express reported. Earlier as the demonstrators waited for the bail application to get underway the words of Johnny Clegg “We Are The Scatterlings of Africa”, echoed through the streets and into the entrance of the court. The court is awaiting outstanding ballistic evidence as the investigation into the Rafferty couple’s murders continues. “I am glad that the accused has been remanded in custody,” said one of the supporters. “We are here today not only showing support for the end to farm murders but also for all crime that goes unnoticed in our country. We are here to support change and to live out the words of our national anthem, which is God Bless Africa. “We need the blessings of God, racial tension is at an all-time high and we need to get rid of this. We are not a racist community but rather a justice seeking community.” Karen Brown, one of the organisers of the protest, said it was a stand against the judicial system. “This is a stand against murder, rape and corruption and the judicial system. We are focusing especially on the point that no bail should be granted to murderers or rapists,” she said. “With tensions running high, the time has come for people of Northern KwaZulu-Natal and South Africa at large to unite.” Meanwhile, Chris Pappas, DA KZN spokesperson on agriculture and rural development, said yesterday an extensive written parliamentary reply to questions posed by the DA KZN had revealed staggeringly low arrest and conviction rates for the past two decades for murders and attacks against farmers and farm workers. The response, by KZN Community Safety MEC, Bheki Ntuli, covers the period 2000 to June 2020 and shows that: • Only 43,7% of the total number of murder cases involving farmers ended in conviction; • Just 56,7% of the total number of arrests involving the murder of farmers ended in conviction; • Just 30,2% of the total number of cases involving the murder of farm workers ended in conviction and; • 42,4% the total number of arrests involving the murder of farm workers ended in conviction. The same reply also includes information on attacks on farmers and farmworkers with the following statistics recorded between 2000 and June 2020: • In terms of attacks on farmers, only 20,7% of the total number of cases opened ended in conviction, while just 49,7% of arrests ended in conviction and; • In terms of attacks on farm workers, just 15,8% of all cases opened resulted in convictions, while only 34,7% of the total number of arrests ending in conviction, Pappas said. He added it was urgent that a solid and feasible plan was implemented in order to turn the current situation around. “It is in this light that the DA has submitted a follow-up written parliamentary question to MEC Ntuli and to SAPS in a bid to ascertain the state of police services within our province’s rural and farming communities. “The DA has also begun to probe the state of land reform in the province and government’s response to the needs of farm workers. “We will also engage with our national colleagues in order to probe the low conviction rate in the Justice system.” — Newcastle Express, WR.