Msunduzi has resumed its disconnections and is threatening to cut off any debtor who does not have a payment agreement in place. This is one of the efforts to curb its runaway debtors book, which is approaching the R4,5 billion mark. The money will also go towards paying the City’s own multi-million debt to Eskom and Umgeni Water after it recently found itself unable to meet its monthly obligations to the utilities. On Thursday City spokesperson Thobeka Mafumbatha said that when the lockdown started municipalities were initially instructed not to cut off services due to non-payment, but that decision was later rescinded as it risked collapsing councils that depended on revenue collection to fund their service delivery programmes. “We understand that some of our residents and local businesses have been negatively impacted by Covid-19 and we are saying to them they must come forward and enter into payment arrangements with the municipality before we disconnect them for non-payment,” Mafumbatha said. She said households that qualified for free basic services must submit their application forms for indigent status. The City would also be disconnecting and fining those found to have tampered with their meters, she said. Some residents have accused Msunduzi of disconnecting them unfairly when their accounts were paid up. Northdale’s councillor Lucky Naicker said he had received several complaints from indigent people and those with prepaid meters who were also disconnected when they should not have been. “At every council meeting we raise this issue of illegal disconnections but every few months we see it happening again. We’ve got the elderly that were left without electricity last week and they had to scramble to pay the reconnection fee to get their lights back on,” he said. Naicker said Msunduzi also needed to deal with its “pay now and ask questions later” attitude when people questioned the disconnections and the amounts reflected on their bills. “In any business the customer is king and you treat them as such, but not in Msunduzi.” Mafumbatha said those who believed they might have been illegally disconnected must come forward with proof that their accounts were indeed up to date.