Safe City has asked Msunduzi Municipality to renew its contract for another three years but there are concerns the municipality is failing to take full advantage of its crime-fighting capacity. The Safe City team operates 169 surveillance cameras, which have helped law-enforcement officers catch a range of criminals since its launch more than 16 years ago. The team not only help with fighting crime and the protection of eight substations, but also with the enforcement of bylaws. Safe City now wants Msunduzi to extend its contract until 2023, but the executive committee is concerned the municipality is not playing its part in terms of responding to reports compiled by Safe City on bylaw infringements, and so is losing out on revenue. In his report, general manager Lucas Holtzhausen said Safe City has the capacity to generate much-needed income for Msunduzi as it also has features such as the automatic number plate recognition (ANPR) system. This could help collect the more than R11 million in outstanding traffic fines. “Unfortunately, ANPR operation has stopped due to manpower issues at the traffic department. We do have the necessary software at our disposal to recommence ANPR at any given time and we would appeal to the municipality to reintroduce these operations,” he said. Holtzhausen said Safe City can also monitor and identify businesses within camera visual areas that discard their refuse on pavements, and can submit video footage and sworn statements for prosecution. However, this is also not being done. DA caucus leader Sibongiseni Majola said the initial intention of having Safe City provide this service was to generate revenue but that is not happening. Majola said it does not make sense that between July 2019 and June 2020, Safe City recorded only 217 traffic violations and 1 114 traffic fines were issued. “Here in Msunduzi, every second there’s a violation of traffic laws. The 1 114 fines are actually a drop in the ocean.” He said the City is also losing revenue on other bylaw contraventions where the enforcement units have not been following up on reports from Safe City. He said that previously, Msunduzi made around R17 million in fines and penalties but the revenue generated has gradually gone down, leading to a budget of only R1 million this financial year. “We are not serious about enforcement.” Majola said drastic change is needed in how Msunduzi uses the footage recorded by Safe City in order to get the full benefits of the service, otherwise it becomes yet another unaffordable expenditure that the municipality can do without. Deputy Mayor Manilal Inderjit said: “Safe City has been created to complement and supplement whatever systems that we have in place. I think the onus is on the Msunduzi Municipality as whole to make sure that proper enforcement and prosecution of transgressors are put in place. We need to take full responsibility for that and hence we should be piggybacking on whatever is available to us.” He said Safe City has been very successful and should be allowed to continue. Ntuthuko Ntshangase of the ANC agreed with him, saying Safe City must be supported by Msunduzi’s law-enforcement unit. He said the municipality should take responsibility for the “limitations” in the enforcement of bylaws. The DA’s Glenn McArthur shared his sentiments: “Safe City needs our officials to do the work and they are not doing that. It’s the same as we are employing more traffic officers but we’re getting less revenue and there are no consequences.” He said the R14 million that Msunduzi budgeted from Safe City is going down the drain because of Msunduzi’s failure to enforce what is captured on cameras. “If our officials are not enforcing then we might as well do away with Safe City but I don’t want to do that because I think it serves a wonderful purpose.” General manager for sustainable development and city entities, Felix Nxumalo, warned exco that there would be chaos if Safe City stopped operating. He said the management will engage with other departments on bylaw enforcement and supporting the entity. “The onus is on us in terms of assisting Safe City in ensuring enforcement. 