Security has been increased at the flats near Jika Joe as victims of last week’s extensive shack fire have threatened to invade them. MEC for KwaZulu-Natal Department Human Settlements and Public Works, Peggy Nkonyeni, directed the head of Department of Human Settlements Mdu Zungu to alert the on-site contractor and the developer, Msunduzi Municipality, to ensure that there was extra security at the community residential units, which are under construction. “As government we cannot afford to have another rental stock being invaded and occupied under our watch in the same municipality as was the case with the Aloe Ridge Westgate social housing project in February 2018,” said Nkonyeni. READ MORE | Deportation is immigrants’ big fear after Jika Joe fire On Monday spokesperson for the KwaZulu-Natal Department Human Settlements and Public Works, Mbulelo Baloyi, said that according to Msunduzi officials, some shack dwellers had turned down relocation assistance from the municipality and had threatened to invade and occupy the nearby flats. He told The Witness that initially 13 security guards were deployed to the construction site but on Sunday it was decided that 10 more should be added. He said there were reports of people pushing open the gate and bringing their belongings onto the site. Baloyi said the government, working with the municipality as well as non-governmental organisations, had always assisted shack fire victims with temporary accommodation as was the case at Jika Joe in December last year. After long discussions and pleas from the City’s leadership citing the cold front that was approaching, some of the shack-fire victims agreed to be relocated to the AF Wood Centre on Boom Street and others were moved to the homeless shelter on Mayor’s Walk. Baloyi said following the completion of assessment by disaster management teams, the provincial Department of Human Settlements would assist with the supply of building material so that shack fire victims could rebuild their homes. “The application for the aid has been submitted to the MEC’s office and it’s being treated as an emergency because we want to give them the building material as soon possible — by Wednesday at least — but the challenge sometimes is the issue of identity documents because some of them lost them in the fire,” said Baloyi. He said the application was for 720 shack owners and each applicant would receive building material valued at R8 000.  Manager for the Department of Home Affairs’ Pietermaritzburg branch, Xolani Maphumulo, confirmed that he had been liaising with Mayor Mzimkhulu Thebolla. He said they were waiting for a list of the fire victims from Msunduzi and would deploy a mobile unit to the temporary shelter once they receive it so that people could reapply for their IDs on site. “The challenge those could be the issue of the cost of the reissue of IDs because Home Affairs is unable to waive those fees at the moment … It’s actually quite a long process that requires the approval of the minister,” said Maphumulo. He said it cost R140 to reissue an ID, while a birth certificate would be R20. Maphumulo said they would also mobilise the immigration department to be available to assist those who lost their passports and permits. “If a person can give us information we can verify who is legal and who is not on site.” WATCH | Fire rips through Pietermaritzburg’s Jika Joe informal settlement, again Businessman and ANC councillor Mehmood Oumar, who has been working with other local businesses to feed the Jika Joe residents since Wednesday, said they would also help with fees for the reissuing of IDs and birth certificates. “We are still feeding them breakfast and supper. We’ve also been assisting with toiletries, sanitary stuff and napkins for the babies. “They also need uniforms, shoes and books because the children need to return to school as soon as possible to write their exams." Oumar said: He said those who wanted to make donations could contact him on 083 278 6647. 