A lack of maintenance by the uMngeni Municipality has left some residents in Winterskloof near Hilton in Kwazulu-Natal stranded after late September rains turned Dalry and Crompton Roads into a muddy mess. Lydia Nel, who lives in Crompton Road, said she would never have been able to get her daughter, Jean-Marie, to school using her tiny Ford Figo. “Luckily, we have a bakkie, but even then I had to put it in 4x4 mode just to get out,” she told The Witness. Lydia said her husband, Jannie, stayed home to allow her to use his bakkie to get Jean-Marie, a matric pupil at Voortrekker High School, to school in Pietermaritzburg to write her trial exam for consumer studies. “The last thing she needed was extra stress because the road was a mess,” Lydia said, “it’s unacceptable for kids to have to worry about where they stay when they are studying.” Jean-Marie is not the only school pupil who faced being marooned. Arlen Loretz, who attends Maritzburg College, was concerned he would miss his second physics exam. His family had to use their Ford Ranger to get out of Crompton Road and onto Valley Road. “When we went to church yesterday, you could feel the car slipping on the road,” his mother, Anneke, told The Witness. “If the rain continues and the council doesn’t do anything, we may not be able to get out of our driveway at all ... it will have a big impact on the whole community.” Like the Nels, the Loretz family have lived in Winterskloof for the past four years and Anneke said this was by far the worst the road had ever been. Neither she nor Lydia believe the situation will improve unless the council steps up and invests in the roads in the area. “Since we moved in, we have had constant meetings, but nothing has been done,” Lydia said. “We are going to have rain for the rest of the year. People have to work. Children have to go to school. Our domestic staff struggle to get to work. It’s unacceptable.” The two roads are gravel and motorists have to drive with care to avoid potholes and ruts. Some residents have tried to fill in the worst holes, and one man, Adrian Vermaak, who has a smallholding in Dalry Road, went so far as to organise a grader to come and smooth out the roads late last week. “The rain has, unfortunately, turned everything into a mudbath,” the owner of Rigging24 said, adding that he was struggling to get some of his trucks out of his property.  Councillor Pam Passmoor said the two roads have been problematic for a long time, adding: “Because the roads are gravel and not tarred, and they have been torn apart by timber trucks, this incessant rain has made them virtually impassable. It’s like chocolate mousse out there.” The councillor spoke to uMngeni Municipality yesterday and was assured they would send a grader to the area to scrape mud off the roads. The Witness approached the municipality for comment, but at the time of going to press none had been received.