Ten months after the death of state advocate
Addelaid Watt, it has still not been decided whether anyone will be held
accountable, and justice has also been delayed yet again in the case she was
trying when she was killed. Provincial prosecutions boss advocate Elaine Zungu
said on Thursday, “The matter is with us. The docket will be studied and a
decision taken, based on the evidence contained therein.” Watt was shot when a firearm that was an exhibit in
court “accidentally” went off, according to police at the time. The incident
happened in November at the Umzimkhulu Magistrate’s Court. In the meantime, the prosecution in the case during
which Watt was killed has gone nowhere since. The matter was supposed to carry
on with evidence on Thursday, but was again adjourned because one of the
accused and an advocate did not come to court. The case revolves around an attack on Cheryl and
Dave Biggs on their farm in Ixopo in March 2014. After six years, Cheryl has
not even had a chance to testify. There are six accused, two of whom, Mvikeli Dladla
and Xolani Nxele, have disappeared. They were granted bail and never returned
to court to stand trial. The other accused are Zethembe Phakthi, who is the
only one still in custody, Nkululeko Dlamini, Sandile Phakathi and Busiswe
Shezi, who did not come to court on Thursday. The prosecutor, Sipho Nkonzo,
said he had been informed that she is “bereaved” and thus could not come for
the case. It is alleged that the attackers used tasers to
shock the couple and held them at gunpoint. It was reported at the time that
they were repeatedly punched. Cheryl suffered a fracture that required surgery. Attorney Petrus Coetzee, who has been instructed by
the Biggses to keep a watching brief in the matter, called the ongoing delays a
“disgrace and a miscarriage of justice”. He said on Thursday was not the first time the case
was adjourned for similar reasons, when one of the accused or a lawyer did not
attend. “It appears to be a pattern,” he said. The last time the matter was in court, the lawyer
who was absent on Thursday was present, and would have known the adjournment
date. Coetzee said the blame can’t be placed on the prosecutor, because he was
ready to proceed and the witnesses were ready to testify. “Addelaid lost her life because of this case. Given
the history of this matter, one would have thought that the legal
representative would have made sure he was in court,” said Coetzee. He said inordinate delays such as this prejudice
the state witnesses who will be requested to recall events that occurred more
than six years ago. Coetzee added that besides the trauma the Biggses
are going through, it has also cost them money to ensure that justice is
carried out. “I have written to the DPP, hence the matter was allocated to an experienced
state advocate [Addelaid Watt], and she was killed.” He added that this case is impacting negatively on
the Biggs family. “What more can we do?” he asked. The case has now been adjourned to October 6 as a
holding date, which means the trial won’t proceed then and another date will
have to be set. The Witness reported
when the Biggses were attacked that the suspects fled with a large quantity of
goods and firearms, which they loaded into the couple’s Isuzu double-cab. A
pearl necklace and a Krugerrand were among the items stolen. The assailants
tied the couple up before fleeing. The Biggses are a well-known family in the Ixopo
area, where they farm timber and beef. 