With the cost of living having gone up, coupled with job
losses and salary cuts, more and more South Africans have found themselves
drowning in debt. For some, going under debt review is an option. A recent survey by Debt Rescue found that 85% of all South
Africans need help either financially, emotionally or both as a result of the
Covid-19 pandemic. A further 55% required financial assistance but had no
access to credit, it found. Those who fall under this category should not borrow money
from illegal credit providers such as loan sharks, said independent economic
analyst, Bonke Dumisa, on Friday. If people who have already borrowed money from the dodgy
lenders are being threatened because they can’t meet their instalments, then
they should report the matter to police, he said. Alternatively, they can approach the National Credit
Regulator to report the loan sharks. Dumisa said that those who borrowed money from legitimate
credit providers should first go to them to make repayment arrangements. If
that does not work, then going for debt counselling is an option. Debt counselling, said the CEO of Debt Rescue, Neil Roets,
makes it possible for debt reviewing companies to negotiate with creditors to
obtain a longer repayment period with smaller repayments without losing assets
like homes and cars. Dumisa said that unlike before, going under debt review does
not come back to bite you at a later stage. “As soon as a person has filled all their obligations, a
letter gets forwarded to all the credit bureaus. The information remains on
your profile and the credit providers can still take it into consideration when
giving credit. However, it is not held against you,” he said. The only way for some people to avoid going bankrupt or
getting sequestrated, is for them to go to debt counsellors to restructure
their debts. He said that some people have landed themselves in debt
because of “conspicuous consumption”. “They were deliberately living beyond their means,” he
added. Roets said that Debt Rescue has seen a dramatic increase in
the number of middle-class professionals seeking to enter the process of debt
counselling. Researcher at the The Pietermaritzburg Economic Justice
& Dignity Group, Julie Smith, said that low-income households are getting
deeper and deeper into debt and can’t pay their existing loans. “At the same time, the cost of living has gone up,” she
added. During the lockdown they exhausted all their financial
options, such as using up their savings and withdrawing money from their
stokvel. They also had to spend more during the lockdown, on food for
instance, because children were not going to school and everyone was at home. Whenever the Reserve Bank cuts the repo rates, said Smith,
it does not help them because they don’t have bonds and are not paying for
vehicles etc. They have no legal instrument to help them. “They are now worried about December and January, the
festive season, church, and then getting ready for school,” she added.