Scelo Duma’s debut novel Rural Dust is a gripping tale of
corruption and abuse of power by a mayor that already has readers wondering if
it’s based on a real-life villain. But the author insists it’s a work of fiction. In an exclusive interview with Weekend Witness Duma, who is
a seasoned local government expert and currently an administrator at Msunduzi,
said he drew from his experience in the field but people can rest assured he is
not airing anyone’s dirty laundry. He said the book is about the subversion of social justice
and corruption in municipalities. It delves into the failures inherent in the
local government system and poverty in South African communities. “Those are the things that caught my attention, that in much
as there’s a discourse in the country about issues of corruption in local
government, no one is writing about how those things impact on people on the
ground, especially people who work with the powerful men and women in local
government.” The villain is a mayor who causes harm to his comrades, his
party, municipal employees and inadvertently the community. Ironically, he
publicly professes to be a priest who even wears the clerical collar and is
thus supposed to be celibate, but his actions say otherwise. The protagonist, Themba, grows up under difficult
circumstances which he tries to escape, and almost always finds himself
tripping and drowning from the potholes of life — particularly the web of
deceit and betrayal set up by his nemesis, the mayor. Midlands residents will recognise some of the local features
in the book including their staple daily read, The Witness, which is mentioned
several times as the newspaper reporting on the shenanigans of the fictional
council. The chief director for municipal governance and
administration at the KZN Department of Co-operative Governance and Traditional
Affairs (Cogta), Duma, said the book took him seven years to write, but he has
been writing from a young age and just never had the courage to publish any of
his work. “I spend a lot of my time writing because of my job. I write
reports about the state of local government in the province and all the reports
on the interventions on all the municipalities are written by me, but when I
get a chance I like writing something different, so I even write poetry.” Since he’s self-funding the printing, Duma first started
with 500 copies and they were sold out within a few weeks. He has already put
in the order for the next batch with some of the copies already having been
sold. Duma said he was overwhelmed by the reception because
initially he just told himself that, as an unpublished author, he would be
happy if he sold 300 copies. He said he did not even put any effort into
marketing the book but somehow word got around, and now even the most powerful
people in the country want to read it. “I’ve received a lot of reviews and comments from people.
They are saying it’s hard to put down and realistic. I think it’s how I’ve
managed to capture the images. I’ve tried to describe the setting and feeling
so that the reader is captured. Some people said they’ve cried reading some of
the parts and I’ve said ‘wow’ because I’m not an emotional person myself,” he
said. Duma jokingly warned those who have not got their hands on a
copy of his book yet, saying while it may not be a horror story, there are
parts that should not be “read at night or while standing”. With Rural Dust, he said, the objective was to send a
message to the leaders in local government without coming across as a Cogta
official preaching down to them, and that is why he chose to use a fictional
medium. “The message is about how power and money can destroy people
that would otherwise have been good leaders and people who would have been
helpful to their communities. It’s about how these two things can change
people’s values.” He said the country is grappling with corruption and
commended President Cyril Ramaphosa for taking a fundamental stance to
challenge his own organisation to deal decisively with graft. “The message in my book is also saying that powerful people
must stop thinking they own the people who are around them and they are just
pawns in their game. I’m also trying to remind them that corruption does not
pay and it destroys our country.” He said if South Africa is going to win the fight against
social ills such as poverty, then leaders have to bravely take a stand against
corruption. Duma is a Pietermaritzburg resident and when he is not busy
with his local government duties he enjoys travelling to other countries.