uMgungundlovu District is moving to start docking its staff’s salaries over the illegal non-payment for municipal services. This came up at Thursday’s special full council meeting where acting head of finance Nondumiso Mbatha presented monthly financial statements indicating that the district’s workers owed the municipality more than R515 000 at the end of July. At least R391 000 of this amount had been owing for more than six months. DA councillor Hazel Lake said this was in contravention of the Municipal Systems Act, which states municipal workers may not be in arrears for rates and service charges for a period longer than three months. The legislation also gives the municipality a right to deduct any outstanding amount from a staff member’s salary after this period. “The DA calls on the municipality to ensure that the appropriate action is taken against these municipal officials as per the guidelines of the code of conduct. These officials cannot in any way be treated differently from ordinary residents as some residents would have been disconnected by now,” said Lake. She said these municipal employees had enjoyed uninterrupted salary payments during the Covid-19 pandemic while thousands of uMgungundlovu residents lost their income and had been struggling to pay for services. “In addition to this, municipal employees have also received annual increases.” Lake also asked the management about councillors owing uMgungundlovu, saying council was previously told that they owed more than R224 000 at the end of March. She said asked why the councillors’ outstanding payments had been dropped from the municipality’s monthly financial reports. She said the municipal manager, Dr Ray Ngcobo, had indicated that councillors had suddenly paid up their outstanding debt, but council had not seen a report confirming this. ANC’s Sandile Gabela said: “It can’t be correct that councillors or municipal staff or officials are seen to be owing the municipality so it would really assist if we were to get a separate report to speak directly to that issue.” He said it was clearly indicated in the previous meetings that council now only wanted a progress report on deductions. “We’re no longer speaking the language of [payment] arrangements. We are only prepared to note the deductions. That is the level of seriousness we are prepared to move with now,” said Gabela. Ngcobo said the district was moving to start with the deductions on salaries of staff who defaulted on payments. He said they would do the same with councillors in future if any of them had outstanding debts. He said the management was busy engaging with the local labour forum to ensure that the deductions did not result to any instability in the municipality. Ngcobo said there were currently no councillors who have defaulted on payments, hence there was no report. “There are one or two councillors — just like any customers — who have questioned our bills and we are dealing with that. 