Opposition parties say Msunduzi is in a far worse position than it was before last year’s reshuffle that led to the appointment of Mayor Mzimkhulu Thebolla and his executive committee. They said the recent spate of service delivery protests were a direct result of how bad things had become. They were giving their assessment of Thebolla’s first year in office, which they said was marked with poor service delivery, lack of concrete action and complacency. DA caucus leader Sibongiseni Majola said the reshuffle came with the terms of reference stemming from the provincial government’s decision to place the City under administration but those were completely ignored. He described this as a grave injustice to the people of Msunduzi. “We are 11 months away from completing this term (which started in 2016) and the only way I can describe it is that it’s a waste of five years because this municipality has achieved absolutely nothing but frustrate the ratepayers and residents,” said Majola. On why council failed to play its oversight role, he said since the term started, they had been receiving reports late, sometimes by up to six months. “I’ve been raising this with the mayor since his arrival. Just last week I said to him that the agendas for his finance portfolio and exco meetings were not rich, did not speak to the challenges faced by the people of Msunduzi nor did they provide insight on how we could get out of this situation.” He said the cloud of corruption continued to hang over the City Hall with no one brought to book, whether it be councillors or officials. “We’ve not received a single report on monies recovered from officials who defrauded the municipality and councillors who were accused of interfering with recruitment and tender processes have never been investigated either.” Majola said amongst the areas that Thebolla failed to deal with was poor revenue collection, which worsened over the past year. He said initially the mayor — as the chairperson of executive and finance committees — committed to address the issue of non-payment of more than 80 000 households who were not billed but later became defensive when asked for a report on the turnaround plan. Rienus Niemand of the ACDP echoed his sentiments, saying there seemed to be deliberate ignorance on how to deal with the theft of municipal services in both the leadership and administration. “Our situation has got worse; it’s like we are not even under administration. The whole reshuffle was a farce. It was a political move that had nothing to do with genuinely wanting to turn this City around.” The IFP’s Thinasonke Ntombela said it was only in Msunduzi where people enjoyed free services without declaring their indigent status. He said even businesses were not billed and the City kept on making excuses when the opposition raised the issue of the equitable implementation of the credit control policy. “We’ve become a capital city that can’t even pay the bulk service providers (Eskom and Umgeni Water) because we live from hand to mouth and have no reserves to help us during difficult time like we saw during Covid-19,” said Ntombela. He said the city was still filthy and there were illegal dumps at every corner despite Thebolla’s promise to deal with waste issues when he was appointed. Ntombela said what was most frustrating was the poor expenditure on grants given to Msunduzi for service delivery. He said people were angry that every year millions were surrendered to the national and provincial government when the City failed to spend, yet they were waiting for things like housing, roads and construction of public facilities. “There are potholes that are more than three years old and some areas have not had working street lights in years. In Mpumuza there are areas that have had to rely on tankers for water and when they don’t come residents have to hire vans to go get water in the other parts ...” EFF regional secretary David Msomi echoed his sentiments, saying Msunduzi had failed its residents.