Pent-up tensions over housing spilled into the streets around Jika Joe on Thursday, where burning tyres and rocks barricaded the roads as residents rioted against what they described as a “gross injustice”. The group was dominated by the victims of Wednesday’s fire, which wiped out over 500 shacks. This sparked the first riot as some demanded to be allowed to move into the neighbouring municipal flats that are currently under construction. Police had to be called to disperse the crowd. While some of the victims of the fire were taken in by their neighbours, others yesterday told The Witness that they slept under the open sky without even a blanket to protect them from the cold. “Our government has completely let us down. We’ve been waiting for housing for more than 20 years and each time there’s a fire we have to start from scratch,” said Nhlanhla Mthiyane. He was among those trying to salvage scraps to rebuild their shacks yesterday. He said it was disappointing that the municipality had not even helped them with building material or blankets and mattresses. “Most of us have had to go to loan sharks to get money to buy planks, nails and doors. Some of us also needed money to buy corrugated iron. We are probably going to sleep on the floor tonight but at least we’ll have a roof over our heads.” Mthiyane along with his neighbour Bongumusa Khanyile joined the riots on Wednesday night and yesterday morning. They said they registered for RDP housing and believed they were among the rightful owners of the flats that were under construction. “We’re tired of waiting ... Some of our friends died waiting for the day we would be allowed to move into these flats and yesterday I nearly died as well because I was sleeping when the fire started,” said Khanyile, who was working the night shift as a security guard. Many were anxious about the unconfirmed reports that only those who could afford to pay rent would be allowed to move into the flats when they were finally completed. “What’s going to happen to the rest of us who can’t afford to pay more than R500 rent a month? I know some of the people can’t even afford that, what’s going to happen to them?” he said. Jika Joe also has a large population of foreigners who would not qualify for government housing. One of them, Lison Banda, has lived in the area with his wife Grace for several years. The couple have a two-year-old son who was home with his mother when the fire started. Yesterday Banda, who is a welder, had to ask for a loan from his employer to buy material to rebuild his shack. “This is the second time this has happened,” he said. He said he did not join the riots over the government housing because he knew he had no right to it. Donations trickle in Yesterday non-profit organisations and individuals came with hot meals, clothes and blankets to help those affected by the fire. Each time a donor arrived, the affected residents dropped their hammers and saws and rushed over to the car to see what they could find. Barefoot and hungry, Sizakele Ndlovu (66), said her all her shoes were burned with the rest of her belongings in the shack she had lived in since her arrival at Jika Joe in 1994. “I live with my four grandchildren. Their parents passed away so I’m now looking after them,” said Ndlovu. She said she left Mkhambathini because of political violence at the time as all her neighbours had either been killed or fled the area. Ward councillor ‘feeling helpless’ Councillor for Ward 33, Sureya Reddy, said while the residents of Jika Joe were within their rights to demand dignified housing, rioting was the wrong way to go about it. She said during the protest the area became unsafe so donors who wanted to come out to help had to stay away. On whether Msunduzi would be assisting with building material, mattresses and blankets, Reddy said the meetings she had with disaster management were not promising as there seemed to be budgetary constraints. “So far the municipality has not been able to give them anything but there’s also been a challenge with the list of the victims because when we tried to get one last night [Wednesday] the group was infiltrated by [political] opportunists and that’s when the first riot started. “Some of the victims have also left the area to seek shelter elsewhere but we still need to know who they are and find out how we can assist. “So at the moment all that I’ve managed to get for those affected by the fire is food and I’m feeling a bit helpless because they’re looking to me for help but I can’t even give them a commitment until I get something concrete from the municipality’s disaster management.” She confirmed that the flats they wanted to invade were not yet ready for occupation as water, sanitation and electricity had not yet been completed. “We must be fair to the contractor and allow them to finish their job before people can move in.” Reddy said she understood the frustration of those affected by the fire as many of them had seen many similar infernos. “I’ve sent out an appeal to organisations and individuals to once again help the people of Jika Joe because they are in desperate need of help. Most of them have no savings they can dip into when something like this happens. Many of them don’t even have salaries because they have piecemeal jobs, which have also been hard to come by since the outbreak of Covid-19."