Many public schools in Pietermaritzburg are not running at
full capacity as some pupils have not returned, despite schools having reopened
last week. And most of those who are back are very happy. Nikita Whitney Naidu said that both her children are back at
primary and high school. “They were more than happy to be back. Work is being
taught as normal, as is the homework they receive. However, they attend school on
alternate days,” she said. This week, Parliament’s portfolio committee on basic
education was informed that KZN is leading in the number of projected drop-outs
since the reopening of schools. The number of children in Grade 7 who have dropped out could
be around 38 541 while in Grade 12 the amount could be around 18 708, the
committee heard. Weekend Witness tried to find out about the attendance and
drop-out rates in local schools. While many did not want to comment, those that
did reported very few to no drop-outs. But all had some pupils doing distance
learning. Principal at Deccan Road Primary Sharon Naidoo said that 60%
of the pupils are back. However, more were returning each day as parents become more
confident in sending their children back. “Some parents indicated they will keep their children until
the Covid-19 figures get lower,” said Naidoo. She added that the school is sanitised daily, even during
the breaks, and that everything is running smoothly. Pupils attend school on
alternate days. At Clarendon Primary School all the grades come to school
every day. School principal Kamla Maharaj said the majority of pupils have
returned, but a few have opted for remote learning. She added that the pupils have settled back in and are happy
to be back. Alexandra High School principal Anusha Pillay said the
Education and Health departments have supported the school, however, the
underlying stress of teaching and living in times of this pandemic can’t be
emphasised enough. “The positive side of this pandemic has created the ideal
class size to give every pupil the needed attention. “The Grade 12s have benefitted from this greatly. Staff have
adapted to these changes as they have adapted to all the changes in education
in the past — with resilience and determination and commitment,” she said, With the exception of Grade 12 pupils, there have been an
average of four pupils per grade who have applied for exemption from
attendance. They will continue with online lessons, said Pillay. There are two grades at school each day. The Grade 12s
attend every day and there is a rotational plan for the other grades, she
explained. Department of Education spokesperson Sihle Mlotshwa said
that in general all schools in Pietermaritzburg are operational and 99% of
children have returned to school. There are a few who have applied for home schooling. Currently
schools have opted for a rotational system, therefore all grades will not be at
school at the same time, except for a few such as Maritzburg College, he said. Thus far only one percent are doing distance learning.
“Unfortunately, numbers and applications continue to come and that leads to
some uncertainty in respect of the actual numbers.” Mlotshwa added that the number of Covid-19 cases at schools
has drastically decreased. For instance, this week there are only three cases that have
been reported.