Nightclubs and the attendance of fans at sport venues remain
banned under the Covid-19 level 1 lockdown, Cooperative Governance and
Traditional Affairs minister, Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma (pictured) said on Friday. Addressing journalists, Dlamini-Zuma said while level 1
meant that the rate of infections had dropped, it did not mean the Covid-19
virus had been eradicated. While restrictions on gatherings such as weddings
and funerals have been relaxed, Dlamini-Zuma said government was of the view
that it was still risky to allow nightclubs and initiation schools to operate. “Night clubs remain closed. We may also, from time to time,
determine a place or premises that must be closed, if there is a risk of any
member of the public being exposed to Covid-19. “We will continue with prohibiting initiation practices for
the duration of the national state of disaster, thus no one may arrange, attend
or hold an initiation school or conduct an initiation practice,” she said. The number of people attending funerals had been increased
to 100 while church gatherings cannot exceed 500 for outdoor worship. “We will also further ease the restrictions in relation to
all social and religious gatherings including conferences, meetings, concerts,
cinemas, theatres, weddings and political gatherings. “Gatherings at casinos and visits to hotels, lodges, bed and
breakfasts, timeshare facilities, resorts and guest houses are limited to not
more than 50% of the capacity of the venue, provided that social distance
protocols are possible,” Dlamini-Zuma said. Gyms were allowed to operate as long as the number of
members inside the venue were below 50% of the facility’s capacity. On the opening of borders and international travel,
Dlamini-Zuma said the international travel ban would remain in place in
relation to countries with high infections. “This means all travellers from the African continent and
from countries outside the African continent with a low rate of infections and
transmission, will resume subject to them having a health clearance certificate
and the directions by the relevant ministers. “However, we must emphasise that every flight, bus, cruise
and train ride carries ... a risk of further transmission. Thus, we will
implement further and strict protocols to limit the risk,” Dlamini-Zuma said. Despite South Africans now being allowed to travel outside
the country, Dlamini-Zuma said some borders would remain shut during level 1
lockdown. “However, given the progress we have made in our fight, 18
land border and three international air ports (OR Tambo, King Shaka and Cape
Town International Airport) will resume operation for international travel from
1 October. “The 35 land borders currently closed, will remain closed
and all commercial seaports will be opened,” she said.