Restaurants this week were warned to comply with lockdown regulations or face being shut down again. Tourism Minister Mmamoloko Kubayi-Ngubane last week said the department had received numerous complaints with regards to restaurants being non-compliant to alert level 2 of the Covid-19 risk-adjusted strategy. He said non-compliance included restaurants operating during curfew, offering take-away alcohol and non-adherence to social distancing or wearing of masks as required by law, amongst other violations. “This does not only risk these businesses’ licences, but also endangers the safety of their loyal customers and dedicated workers,” said Kubayi-Ngubane. The Restaurant Association of South Africa’s (Rasa) CEO, Wendy Alberts, said restaurants and other businesses in the sector had had some months to adapt. “It’s not for the restaurant operator or the public to decide that they feel the numbers are down, and therefore they don’t need to adhere to protocols,” Alberts said. Con Malherbe, owner of several restaurants in Pietermaritzburg, including Coffeeberry, said he has had no problems so far with compliance except for a few people who have been impatient with the screening process. “We don’t have issues with the regulations. We’ve managed to adapt, learning from the early days in lockdown ... We’ve managed social distancing effectively — we have 50% of our furniture locked away and our landlord has graciously given us extra space on the piazza for distancing. Alcohol has never been a big part of our business and we have not run into any problems with that,” said Malherbe. He said they had a few people who were impatient with the screening process when entering the restaurant. “There have been a few who did not want to wait to be screened but we have had to enforce the regulations no matter what. The vast majority are exceptionally patient and things run smooth.” Ryan Solomon, owner of the Barn Owl in Curry’s Post, said he was functioning more efficiently with reduced capacity. He said he had inspectors visit his premises on two occasions to do spot-checks on compliance. “I was running an 80-seater and am now a 50-seater. People are booking more, and it allows us to plan a bit more. We actually don’t have seats for more people. We are a very outdoor focused restaurant and lots of people are choosing to be outdoors ... I’ve added an extension to the restaurant with a stretch-tent so we can have more social distancing. So we have no issue with compliance. “Inspectors have come twice and as everything was in order, we’ve had no problems,” said Solomon. He said he did come across a few customers who had refused to wear a mask. “But we’ve made it quite clear that people without masks won’t be accommodated and that others in the restaurant would mind them not wearing it. It resolved pretty quickly thereafter,” said Solomon. Witness reader Duane Jonkers on Facebook said he had been to a local restaurant where staff, besides not sanitising before serving, were chatting to each other without masks while he was waiting for his order. “The guy refused to put a mask on even after I complained to the manager on duty, yet he was sitting in the nook right next to the area where the food is prepared. I complained on the restaurant’s website but no one has responded,” said Jonkers. Nomusa Dube-Ncube, MEC for Economic Development, Tourism and Environmental Affairs, said their department was working together with the Departments of Labour and Health to ensure compliance with health and safety regulations. “We are doing spot-checks across the province. We have been receiving many complaints across the province but the majority are complying. “We are just appealing to restaurant owners and patrons to be considerate with their actions and to adhere to the protocols for everyone’s safety. They must not spoil the excitement. “They must realise that their irresponsible behaviour has the potential to take us backward. As the tourism and hospitality industry, it is crucial for us to move forward now,” said Dube-Ncube.