NEWS  This week Weekend Witness can reveal that the City is spending
more than R600 000 a month on security for just three people. This amount covers 13 bodyguards and guns. This is separate expenditure from the 58 bodyguards for the
other 15 councillors we reported on last week following Msunduzi’s appearance
before the portfolio committee on cooperative governance and traditional
affairs. Richards Bay security company Take Law Contracting and
Trading, bills Msunduzi R647 450 a month for 12 bodyguards at a cost of R40 150
each and the thirteenth guard costs R39 500. The amount also includes R11 700
for the firearms and R30 000 for a vehicle. On Friday City spokesperson, Thobeka Mafumbatha, confirmed
that Take Law has a contract to guard the City’s top leadership, the troika. The troika consists of four members; Mayor Mzimkhulu
Thebolla, his deputy Cllr Manilal Inderjit, Speaker Eunice Majola-Zondi and
Chief Whip Vusi Ntshangase. Mafumbatha said six of the Take Law guards are assigned to
Thebolla while the remainder are for the other two troika members. “Deputy Mayor (Inderjit) is guarded by internal staff,” said
Mafumbatha. She also confirmed that no security threat assessments were
done by the police on either of the political office bearers. The current legislation decrees that mayors, deputy mayors
and speakers are entitled to two bodyguards each and the municipality may only
deviate from this if that is part of the recommendations on the police
assessment report. Asked why Msunduzi decided to get Take Law guards for the
protection of political office bearers when the City already has Royal Security
providing security services to the municipality, Mafumbatha said “firearms were
taken away from the municipality” and the company also provides guns. Take Law was appointed on a month-to-month contract in
November using the emergency procurement clause of Msunduzi’s supply chain
management policy. In 2018/19 Msunduzi spent R27,5 million on bodyguards for
councillors who all belong to the ANC.  On Friday DA caucus leader, Cllr Sibongiseni Majola, and
ACDP’s Cllr Rienus Niemand said the “exorbitant” expenditure on bodyguards is
not only irregular but also criminal as it robs the citizens of Msunduzi of
service delivery. “We are in the middle of a civil war and it’s being funded
by the ratepayers. The irony is that it’s just one party (ANC) involved in all
of this but we as the ratepayers are just watching and footing the bill,” said
Niemand. He said Msunduzi is in financial distress and now at the
point where it cannot even meet its fixed monthly financial obligations yet
millions are spent on bodyguards without any council approval or the
involvement of the police to ascertain if there are any genuine threats.  Majola said not only was the process not followed on the
allocation of bodyguards, this expenditure is also in contravention of
Msunduzi’s cost containment which says the troika members must only have a
maximum of two guards per shift. “I don’t want to sound like I don’t care about
their safety but if there must be a deviation from the regulation then let us
see the police report with the necessary recommendations. “I must add that the implementation of those recommendations
is also subject to the availability of funds on the budget and right now we
don’t have that money.” Majola said the municipal manager, Madoda Khathide, and
chief financial officer, Nelisiwe Ngcobo, have a legal duty to investigate any
irregular expenditure and based on the findings, that amount must either be
recovered or written off. “This expense has not been disclosed to council and we haven’t
even seen the contract on Take Law’s appointment ... The municipality is now
forced to compromise on service delivery to fund this.”