More than 200 Pietermaritzburg residents responded to the call to join Saturday’s peaceful protest against corruption and poor service delivery. This was part of the “Move One Million” campaign, which was started by Jarette Petzer and has gained traction with South Africans all over the globe adding their voices on the Facebook group. On Saturday South Africans living in different parts of the world took part in the peaceful protests and Pietermaritzburg residents also hiked from World’s View to Wylie Park. Monique Louw, Ursuhla Govender and Lara Edmonds, the group’s local representatives and organisers for the Pietermaritzburg event, were thrilled by the turnout, saying it was the unity that this country needed in order to effect real and lasting change. “We want all of us to truly unite and take a stand against all forms of injustices. That starts with understanding that change is only going to come if we work together, it starts with each individual saying ‘I want better for my country so I’m going to do better’. “It might seem like too little to others but just start by greeting everyone you meet, say thank you to the person who packs your groceries at the supermarket and give way to the pedestrians who are waiting to cross the road,” said Louw. Govender added that other things that people could do is to clean up the areas outside their homes where the municipality has failed or get together with their neighbours to fix up public facilities. “Complaining about how much the government has failed us has not helped so we need to take back our power otherwise we are going nowhere as a country.” She said the aim was also to take the campaign to the townships so that those who have been frustrated by delays in service delivery can also be given a voice. “People want to be heard but the powers that be don’t want to listen and that’s why we end up with protests. If we can empower each other to get everyone’s voices heard without burning tyres and closing roads then I believe we would have achieved something great.” The object would be to hold the decision makers accountable so that South Africans could get the service delivery that they deserved and not live in fear of being targeted by criminals. “We need to start speaking with one voice that will echo all over the country.”