Instead of waiting for the municipality, a Pietermaitzburg resident pays to have potholes fixedMohammed Timol wants to give other residents hope that they can make a changeHe welcomes donations, but doesn't rely on them  Tired of complaints and waiting for the municipality to fix potholes and keep the verges clean in Scottsville, 55-year-old Mohammed Timol has for the past seven years been doing some of the work at his own cost. Timol, who is wheelchair bound as he has one leg, said ever since moving to Scottsville seven years ago he had noticed that many cars were being damaged as a result of potholes in the area and that crime was rampant because of the overgrown verges and lack of proper street lighting. “I saw many cars getting damaged and that nothing was being done about. I used to own a tarring company and thought that perhaps I could be of assistance. “So, I got together some of my labourers, and we started filling the potholes,” said Timol. Shying away from publicity, as “charity should be done and not spoken about”, Timol only agreed to speak to The Witness in an attempt to give hope to other residents. “I just want people to know that they are not helpless. “It is what I want to do to make a difference. If we all start looking at our space as our world, and start making a difference, slowly the world will be a better place,” said Timol. He said some residents assisted him financially to pay for the material or labour involved and other times, he covered the cost himself. “I’ve stopped keeping track of the expenses. “Donations and sponsorships are always welcomed but the lack of it does not dictate whether the repairs and maintenance is done. I make a plan somehow and get it done together with other community members,” said Timol. The most recent pothole project undertaken was in Millborrow Road, while other roads include Chapman, Ridge and wherever Timol sees potholes when driving. Berry’s Pools has sponsored him a saw for the trimming of the trees on verges. Ward councillor Suraya Reddy said despite continuous reporting of the potholes, lack of maintenance and lighting in the area, the municipality failed to respond. “So if residents are taking it upon themselves to sort out the area they live in, I am not going to stand in their way and object to it.  She said the complaints were escalated to the municipality’s rapid response meetings where the departmental heads hold the relevant people responsible. “When I sit in these meetings, I hear the same story every week. It’s always budget constraints and shortage of skilled manpower. “The waste department is now slowly getting its act together. The rest of the departments are a mess. “Residents are ultimately left with no choice — it should not be the case,” said Reddy.