Parents of pupils who fear being robbed at knife-point en route to school in the vicinity of Dunveria Secondary school want action to protect their children. The school has sent out an appeal to police to have regular patrols from 7 am to 7.45 am, when pupils are on their way to school and has issued a warning to pupils to walk together in groups. The school is also appealing to parents, who are available in the morning, to accompany the children to school and to position themselves on the route to ensure the children’s safety. In the past few weeks, several children have had their cellphones stolen on their way to school. One grade ten pupil, who did not want to be named, said she was late for school last Monday and had to walk alone when she was pounced upon. “It happened very close to the school, on the main road from Copesville going across to Dunveria. “I was walking in a hurry and had my headphones on and cellphone in my pocket. I normally walk with the other children but I was late on Monday. “Before I knew what was happening, this guy with a knife just came in front of me and pulled my headphones, ripped the phone off me and ran. It was horrible. “All I saw was the knife,” said the 15-year-old pupil who lives in Copesville and walks to school daily. Another grade eight pupil said he too was walking to school — but with two other boys — when the men pounced on them with knives and demanded their cellphones. The pupil said he had no choice but to hand over the phone. A resident, who was in her car and on her way to work, said for a few weeks now, she had been noticing groups of men hanging around the pathway that the pupils use to school. She said on occasion she had also noticed the scholar-patrol comforting children who had been robbed. “For a few days I noticed that something was going on. On Monday I stopped and spoke to the scholar patrol who was comforting the girl and I found out that she had been robbed,” said the resident. Dunveria Secondary school acting deputy principal Mr Fabian Reddy said they were perturbed by the recent spate of attacks on the pupils. “We have had traumatised children coming to school after they were robbed en route. Our school security guards are on high alert but they are busy with screening pupils in the morning and cannot leave the school premises. Educators have also been threatened on occasion,” said Reddy. He said they have warned the pupils to walk in groups and asked police to conduct extra patrols from 7 am to 7.45 am. “Short of any other measures, we are urging parents, who are available, to please accompany the children to school and for others to position themselves along the route, especially in the area where the attacks are taking place.” SAPS Mountain Rise spokesman warrant officer Joshua Maistry however said they had not received any complaints with regards to crime in the area of the school and no cases had been opened. 