It has taken the police five months to start actively working on the case of two Imbali boys who were attacked by pitbulls in March. The owner of the dogs, who asked not to be named in fear of reprisals from the community, told The Witness on Thursday that the police only charged her on Tuesday this week — a day after The Witness questioned the police about the matter. In March, two boys — aged seven and nine years old — were attacked by two pitbulls while they were at soccer training grounds in Imbali Unit 2, opposite Imbalenhle Clinic. According to the parents, the nine-year-old boy managed to strangle one of the dogs to death during the attack, while the seven-year-old put both his hands inside the other dog’s mouth to pull its upper and lower jaws apart after it had latched on to his leg. Snenhlanhla Mdunge, the mother of the seven-year-old boy, said she saw the dog that attacked her son several times after the attack. “At times I thought of running it over with my car, but I would ask myself how that would help and just leave it. The woman who owns the dogs knows that her dogs attacked our kids, but she never apologised to us,” she said. Mdunge also alleged that the owner has since moved the dog from the area. Zanele Mooi Zondi, the grandmother of the nine-year-old boy, told The Witness that her grandchild’s wounds have healed but he was still very traumatised by the incident. “He is very scared of dogs. I was walking him to school recently and we came across a dog and he frantically ran onto the road without even looking if there were any cars coming.” Both parents said they would seek counselling for the children as they were both still traumatised. Mdunge said her son now has night terrors. The owner of the dogs explained that only one of the animals was actually a pitbull. She said the dog that was strangled to death was a mixed-breed and did not belong to her. She said the owner of that dog had left it with her so the two dogs could mate. “Bruno [her pitbull] was a very friendly dog and he loved people. I always made sure he was in the yard. He has his doghouse at the back and I always kept him chained to a pole,” she said. The woman explained that on several occasions before the attack Bruno would go missing. She said she suspected that youngsters from the community would steal Bruno from her yard when no one was home and use him in immature dog fights, then bring him back a few days later. She recently installed new fencing around her home to make sure that even if the dog breaks free from the chains, he cannot leave the yard. “On the day of the attack I suspect he was stolen again. A day after the children were attacked, I found Bruno chained in my yard again, I don’t know who brought him back,” said the woman. “I’m very sad about what happened. After the attack I couldn’t sleep or eat. It still traumatises me.” The woman denied that she has relocated the dog, but alleged that it was yet again stolen a few months ago. The attack was reported to the police on March 12 by the boys’ soccer coach, Sandile Sindani. Sindani said he has not heard from the police and alleged that he did not even receive the case number via SMS. Mdunge said they were not happy with how the case was being handled. She said they only got the case number on Wednesday last week after asking Plessislaer police station about the case. SPCA: ‘NOT OUR JOB TO REMOVE DOGS’ Meanwhile, Roland Fivas from the Pietermartzburg SPCA told The Witness that it was not the SPCA’s job to remove vicious dogs from their owners. “We deal with the safety of animals, not the safety of people. The animal can only be removed after a court order has been issued to do so.” Fivas said dog attacks were a common occurrence. “... People get these dogs and they don’t have the proper fencing for it. It’s not the dog’s fault. You take a pitbull and you put it on a chain, when that chain breaks what’s the first thing it’s going to do? “It’s going to run wild and probably go bite someone because it’s not used to people. The owners of those dogs brought what happened upon themselves and quite frankly they should be charged because it’s criminal negligence,” said Fivas. CASE ‘CLOSED UNDETECTED’ Police spokesperson Sergeant Mthokozisi Ngobese said a case number is automatic because the process of opening a case is computerised, making it very strange that parents only received a case number last week. He said according to the police system, this case had been “closed undetected”. “If a case is closed undetected that means there is no information or evidence on that matter. The investigating officer (IO) said he couldn’t find the dogs’ owner because the complainant [coach Sindani] said the pitbulls came with two boys who [Sindani] ‘only knows by sight’. The IO was unable to locate where the dogs came from so the case was closed.” After speaking to Sergeant Ngobese, Mdunge went back to the police station on Tuesday and the case was reopened. Ngobese said the district commander’s office is investigating how this matter was handled and why it was delayed. He added that in a situation where a dog has attacked someone, the owner is arrested, and the police call the SPCA to remove the animal.