NEWS Lion farms could put public health and thousands of animals at risk of disease. This is according to a joint scientific study by Blood Lions and World Animal Protection, which highlights how lion farms in South Africa pose a potential health risk to thousands of local and international tourists, as well as the work force and respective communities. Blood Lions said in a statement researchers from the two organisations reviewed almost 150 scientific studies investigating diseases in African lions. “They identified 63 pathogens that affect lions, some of which can be passed from lions to other animals, and some to humans.   The health risks are not only of concern for lions but also for people. Zoonotic diseases can be passed between animals and humans when people come in close contact with wildlife. Many lion farms promote direct contact with the animals for tourism activities, where people pay to pet and hand-rear cubs, as well as recreational hunting for “trophies”. Farmed lions are also killed so their bones can be exported to Southeast Asia for use in traditional medicine products, requiring many industry workers to handle lions during the slaughter, preparation and export of the skeletons, they said. “Captive lions can carry a range of harmful pathogens that can affect humans, including Sars-CoV-2, the virus that causes Covid-19. Despite the large numbers of lions bred in captivity and the long list of diseases found to affect them, the researchers did not find any scientific studies investigating health and diseases on commercial lion farms in South Africa. Without this vital information it is impossible to effectively prevent, monitor or manage potential health risks on these farms.” Dr Louise de Waal, campaign manager for Blood Lions says “the research identified substantial gaps in our knowledge base concerning the captive lion breeding industry, which can have huge health implications for farm workers and tourists.  With the High-Level Panel expected to make recommendations to the Minister of Environment, Forestry and Fisheries (DEFF) around the management, breeding, hunting, trade and handling of among others lions before the end of the year, we hope that they will take note of these important findings”. “With tourism slowly beginning to reopen, we have the opportunity to do better. To be better. To create a greener and kinder tourism without wildlife exploitation. The kind of tourism that keeps it wild,” De Waal added. 