One of the suspects in the murder of a 77-year-old Matimatolo woman who was allegedly killed for her social grant hanged himself in his police cell in Greytown. There was confusion outside the Greytown Magistrate’s Court on Monday as he and a second suspect, the daughter of the victim, had been expected to appear on a bail application. It is believed the suspect, said to be the second suspect’s boyfriend, used his T-shirt to hang himself on Sunday. The disgruntled residents from Matimatolo, near Greytown, protested outside the court calling for the remaining suspect to be denied bail. The suspects were arrested at their home in Matimatolo on September 10. The police could not comment on whether the surviving suspect would be released. The Witness established that the first suspect, had given the police a statement with the details of the murder. Lindeni Cele was attacked at her home on the morning of August 30 and robbed of her social grant. She was found lying in a pool of blood in front of her house with her throat slit. Her brother, Gedleyihlekisa Cele, was among residents outside court calling for the suspect to be given a heavy sentence. He said: “When we arrived in court, we were told that her boyfriend hanged himself in the police cells. He is a coward, he should have waited for the law to take its course. “She must not be granted bail. We want the court to give her a heavy sentence for what she did to my sister,” said Cele. Another family member, Xhawulile Ndlovu, echoed Cele’s sentiments. “We are in court to oppose the bail application for the suspect. “The community of Matimatolo is baying for her blood. She should not be granted bail because the community is disgusted for what she did to the old woman,” she said. A community leader, Gcinokwakhe Gumede, urged the residents to unite and fight against gender-based violence. Gumede also urged the community leaders to form community policing forums in their wards. KZN police spokesperson Captain Nqobile Gwala said: “[On Sunday] the 50-year-old suspect was found hanging in the police cells. “An inquest docket was opened at Greytown police station for investigation. The circumstances around the incident are being investigated.”