THE devastating impact of Covid-19 on Msunduzi Municipality’s finances has put the council under pressure to pull out of its multimillion rand sponsorship of Maritzburg United Football Club. The municipality, which has in the past been injecting between R9 million and R12 million per year into the club, is in deep financial trouble and is unable to keep up with scheduled payments to creditors. Senior ANC members within the Moses Mabhida regional leadership now want the municipality to pull the plug on the sponsorship deal. “As we speak the Msunduzi Municipality is struggling to deliver basic services due to financial constraints,” said one senior ANC member in the region. “As the ANC in the region how do we tell ratepayers that there is no money for basic services when on the other hand the municipality is dishing out millions of rands to a soccer club,” he said. Of concern to ANC leaders in the region are rumours that the Msunduzi Municipality management is submitting a proposal to the relevant portfolio committee that the council should increase its sponsorship of Maritzburg United to R15 million for the coming soccer season. National ANC MP and Msunduzi resident Mervyn Dirks has threatened to initiate parliamentary processes to block the sponsorship if it is approved by the municipality’s management. “The fact of the matter is that the Msunduzi Municipality is technically bankrupt. It owes Eskom more than R200 million and is also unable to collect its debts from creditors. “Even if council approves a lower amount than the R15 million which management has allegedly proposed, we will still challenge the decision. There is no money to sponsor any soccer club at the moment,” he said. Part of the reason the municipality entered into the deal was to lift the profile of Pietermaritzburg by ensuring that the city had a team in the country’s highest level of football competition. Maritzburg United, which finished this season in seventh position on the Absa Premiership log, receives a monthly grant of about R2 million from the Premier Soccer League (PSL). There have been fears in the past that the club, which does not have a title sponsor, could relocate to a municipality willing to sponsor it if Msunduzi withdraws sponsorship. Msunduzi Mayor Mzi Thebolla, who declined to confirm whether the municipality’s management had proposed that the club should get R15 million in the next season, said the deal had to be properly evaluated before any decision was made. “I know nothing about the management’s proposal, but in any case such a proposal would have to be approved by council for it to be binding. “I think as a municipality some of the things we should be interested in establishing is the extent to which the presence of the club is making a difference in the lives of residents. “For example, are there any small businesses, particularly hawkers selling goods during soccer matches, who are currently benefiting. “We should also be interested in establishing whether the presence of the club was having any positive impact on the development of soccer in the area. “In the end, we might have to determine that which is affordable to the municipality given the current economic situation. But I think it would be highly irresponsible to just say stop the sponsorship without first taking into account all these factors,” he said. Maritzburg United chairperson Farook Kadodia said he would wait for the municipality to conclude its deliberations on the matter before commenting.