Hilton residents are set to lose their post office branch at the Quarry Centre after the landlord terminated the state-owned entity’s lease. It was initially believed that the South African Post Office had made the decision without consulting the local community. But, according to KwaZulu-Natal spokesperson Nobuhle Njapha, it was the owner of the shopping centre who made it impossible for the postal service to keep the branch open. The Witness understands that the post office had asked for a lease of five years but was only offered one year. Negotiations ground to a halt as a result of the Covid-19 lockdown, with the branch opting to pay on a month-to-month basis. The Quarry Centre’s Mark Keal, from the The Keal Property Group, confirmed that the Hilton Post Office would be closing, adding in a statement: “The notice to terminate the post office’s lease was due to their very inconsistent rental payments over the past few years when compared to other retail tenants.” For residents and businesses this means that from September 18 they will have to travel to Pietermaritzburg or Howick to use the post office. Mike Forsyth, who lives and runs a legal practice in Hilton, described the decision as crazy, given the town’s rapidly growing residential community, the fact that businesses were moving from Pietermaritzburg to the area, and because the branch was a payment point for pensioners and social grant recipients. Forsyth only discovered the branch was set to close last week when he called in to collect a parcel. “There was a notice on the door, but I didn’t really notice it. Then when I was at the counter the guy I was dealing with said, ‘Don’t forget that we will be closing in two weeks.’ I was shocked,” he said. “I understand that the post boxes will be remaining for the foreseeable future, but people who need to collect parcels or grants will have to go to Cascades Post Office, which is roughly a 24-km round trip. For those of us with our own transport this is a major irritation but manageable. “For the indigent this will mean possibly two taxis to get to the Cascades Post Office and two taxis back. This is expensive for people who rely on their small grants. It is unconscionable that they should be faced with this additional time delay and big expense.” Forsyth raised the issue with DA ward councillor Craig Millar who, in turn, demanded an explanation from Martin Coetsee, the regional general manager: operations KZN. He was reportedly told that the decision to close the facility was caused by the post office suffering losses as a result of being unable to operate during the early part of the lockdown. “It is sad to see yet another state-owned enterprise unable to meet its obligations,” Millar said. He added that he intends raising the matter with his ward committee, the wider public, business, public interest groups and ratepayers associations in the hope of coming up with a workable solution. Millar added that he also thinks it is unacceptable to expect residents of Hilton, Emandleni, Kwajeke, Nhlalakahle, Kanya Village, Cedara, Winterskloof and World’s View, who are currently served by the Hilton Post Office, to travel long distances to access a service that could be supplied locally. Mike Tarr, chairperson of the Hilton Ratepayers Association, said the closure of the post office would disappoint many people. He said that the timing, in the midst of the Covid-19 pandemic, was also highly inappropriate because so many people were relying on grant money to survive and it was unacceptable to expect them to use a large part of that income on travel expenses. Njapha told The Witness that employees working at the Hilton branch, and the equipment they used, would be redeployed to other branches in Pietermaritzburg — including those in Willowton and the Liberty Midlands Mall — to ensure waiting times did not become a problem. “We have introduced separate queues for customers who collect the special Covid-19 relief grant,” she added. “This ensures that customers who visit our branches for other transactions are not unduly inconvenienced. 