The families of the 13 people who died in the New Greytown Road crash on Tuesday were inconsolable as they spoke of unfulfilled dreams and shattered hopes that will now never be realised. They were speaking to The Witness after a gathering and prayer at the scene of the accident, which later moved to the Mpolweni sports field. READ MORE | 12 people killed in horror KZN crash have been identified, including pregnant woman  Sibusiso Goge, who lost youngest child Nontando Goge (22), described her as the most disciplined and loving daughter. “She was forever smiling … I still find myself calling for her around the house then it hits me that she’s gone when the words are already out of my mouth,” he said. On the day of the accident, Nontando was on her way to uMgungundlovu FET College to find out about their academic programmes because she planned on furthering her studies. Her father said she took a gap year after matric and recently told her parents that she now wanted to go back to school. “We were all excited for her because we could see how much she was looking forward to it. She left in the morning and we were going to catch up when she got back but it turned that was her final goodbye,” said Goge.  A domestic worker, Thulisile Ngubane (41) had just cleared a site and bought building material for her home. She was among those who perished in the crash. Her family described the mother of two as the most selfless and loving person who was the first to rush to their side whenever any of them needed help. “She had a heart of gold and never wanted to see anyone she loved suffering. She would sacrifice whatever she had to help her family,” said her uncle Bonginkosi Ngubane. He said she was due to get married soon and had already started making plans for her big day even though the date had not been set. Mlungisi Chamane lost his high school sweetheart, Jabulisile Khwela (33), who was employed in the office of the premier, Sihle Zikalala. The pair had been together for 16 years and had three children. They left home just a few minutes apart on Tuesday with Khwela going to work in Pietermaritzburg and Chamane taking a neighbour to Grey’s Hospital. “I got to the scene a few minutes after the crash happened and the traffic officers were redirecting cars to take another route but I didn’t know she was there.” He said he felt his heart dropping as he drove away from the scene but he did not know why. He then tried phoning her several times but only started panicking when he phoned her office and they said she had not arrived for work. Chamane said: Chamane said Khwela had just finished building a house for her family as she only got a permanent job in March this year. He said she started work later than her peers because she only did her post matric qualification after they had all their children, aged between 10 and 14 years. “I wanted her to study further because I thought I’d die first and I wanted her to be able to support our family when I’m gone. “We were just recently talking about saving for our 14-year old’s university tuition fees because we were finally at the point where we could afford such things,” said Chamane. Thobani Ngubane said his brother, Siyakhula Gwamanda (30), had recently completed his diploma in public management and was still looking for a permanent job. Gwamanda was working as a temporary driver for a company in Pietermaritzburg. “We were expecting great things from him because my brother was one of those people that were self-driven and wanted to succeed.” He said his mother, Sibongile Gwamanda, was still battling to accept that her son was gone. Seven of the people who were injured in the accident are still in hospital with two of them in a critical condition and the rest being treated for major injuries. THE VICTIMS • Unborn baby • Siyakhula Gwamanda (30) • Siphesihle Dladla (25) • Nontando Goge (22) • Nomusa Khanyile (38) • Phundile Mtolo (40) • Siphesihle Hlophe (25) • Jabulisile Khwela (33) • Nqobile Zulu (30) • Thulisile Ngubane (41) • Nhlanhla Dlamini (57) • Londeka Sishi (25) • Nompumelelo Mvelase (19)