 These were the words of Melanie Jones, who owns a
boerboel, Rover, that mauled her 38-year-old neighbour Shamil Hoosen in
Northdale on Tuesday morning. Hoosen suffered 47 bite wounds. Jones however said her dog had done nothing wrong
and was only trying to protect her and her family at the time and claimed it
had been provoked. When The Witness contacted Hoosen on
Thursday to get his response to this allegation he declined to speak to the
paper. Speaking to The Witness at her home on
Thursday, Jones said her dog had attacked Hoosen because he was tampering with
their gate. She runs a tuck shop and according to her Hoosen
came and stood outside her gate on Tuesday morning to ask for cigarettes on
credit. She refused to give it to him and told him as it
was still the beginning of the week he could not come and ask for credit. “He stood by the gate for about 30 minutes and
refused to move. We left him outside the gate and went back inside the house.
The next thing we heard screams. The guy had picked up the gate from the
outside and the dog managed to get out and attacked him. “When we got out of the house the dog was on top on
him and he was holding it by the collar. I ran down to the gate and took a
plank with me. I used the plank to block the dog from attacking him on the neck
and on his face. I was worried that if the dog bit his neck then there was
nothing we can do,” she said. She said after she blocked the dog with the plank
she begged Hoosen not to move because that was going to make the dog attack him
more while he wrestled with it. She said a neighbour came out and gave her an
extension cord that she used to pull the dog off Hoosen. “I put the extension
around his collar and I pulled him off,” she said. Jones said she is also still traumatised by the
incident. “We got the dog for protection because only women
live here in this house and this place is very dangerous,” she added.  “We are not going to put the dog down because on my
part it did nothing wrong. The dog was trying to protect us and that is his job
anyway. If you are coming to my gate and tampering with it — the dog is going
to get defensive and attack you. “He [Hoosen] is our neighbour. He always comes here
and buys cigarettes here, the dog knows him. He did something to provoke the
dog. There is no way that it would have just gone to the gate and attacked him. “I am the one who helped him and saved his life. We
have a good relationship with him. “I risked my life to save his because I did not
know what to expect from the dog and he is making us look like we are the bad
people,” she said. Jones said after she managed to get the dog off
Hoosen the dog just walked away, without trying to attack Hoosen again. She said the dog has been with her family since it
was a puppy and had never attacked anyone else before. Jones added that since the incident she has tried
to reach out to Hoosen and find out how is he doing but he is not answering
their calls. “The last time I spoke to him to check how he was
is when he came out of hospital.”