First bludgeoned with a hammer that broke from the force of the attacks, his wife bound and tied before being assaulted, an Ashburton pensioner who recovered from that brutal attack has since had several other attempted break-ins at their home. READ | Pietermaritzburg pensioner fighting for life after horror hammer attack Well-known artist Ockert “Ocky” Kruger (63) of Northview Road, managed to recover from the horrific attempt on his life after spending more than a month and a half in hospital and strengthening security measures at this home — only to have a series of attempted break-ins in the past few weeks. “Again, every time they have cut through the fence. The most recent incident they actually pulled off the beams. At least this last time we were not physically attacked. But the same thing keeps happening. They are coming through the bush on the side, cutting the fence or breaking up the fences. “This time when the beams went off, a friend who is staying with us, bravely went out to check. We stood inside in case there were people around to attack us." Kruger added: Another resident, engineer Ravi Ronny who has had his Ashburton property broken into six times since July, has fled his home with his family. In the first incident, the robbers got into his home while they were asleep on the upper level of their double-storey home and made off with flat screen televisions, laptops, and other electronic devices. “Every other month they have broken into our premises at some point. I have started building a wall but they still gain access where the fence is. It just became too much and we were forced to leave to another house,” said Ronny. He added: Brad Pascoe, chairman of the Ashburton Ratepayers Association, said while there were still sporadic incidents, the area had seen a sharp decline in crime since the MI7 security company increased their patrols. “We had a really bad spell 10 weeks ago. Now it’s on the decline. MI7 has been assisting us and they are actually unbelievable. Initially they began patrolling at night and we had no issues then. The robbers then realised they were out and about so every day like clockwork they attacked from 10 am to 12 noon. “So MI7, free of charge, and to all residents — even those who are not subscribers, conduct day patrols as well and react to assist whoever is in need of help,” said Pascoe.