A humble young man who was always willing to help others is how Jika Joe residents described Mduduzi Ngcobo (32), who was killed in an accident on his way from getting timber to rebuild his home on Monday night. Apparently the bakkie he was travelling was rear-ended by a truck and overturned on the N3 at Cedara. The other three people who were with him and the two people in the truck were also injured. READ MORE | Guards to block flat invasion by Pietermaritzburg shack fire victims On Tuesday his mother, Patricia Ngcobo, said her son had gone to get timber because they wanted to rebuild their home that burned down during last Wednesday’s shack fire. The Ngcobos have lived in Jika Joe since 1996 and Mduduzi worked as a cleaner at the Brookside Mall. Ngcobo said her son was a responsible father and loved his four-year-old daughter dearly. “Her mom died when she was just four months old so she came to live with us. Now she will grow up without both her parents, but I’ll do my best to raise her the way they would have wanted to,” she said. Senzo Sisibo said he lost a brother in his longtime friend Mduduzi who was always willing to help his neighbours. He said Mduduzi was humble and worked hard because he wanted only the best for his daughter. Sisibo said: Councillor for Ward 33, Suraya Reddy, said the news of Mduduzi’s death devastated the entire community because they thought they had escaped the fire disaster without any casualties. “We were so relieved when no one died from the fire, but now this happens when his family was still trying to rebuild their lives. My heart really goes out to Patricia and her family,” she said. Councillor Sifiso Nene of the IFP, who knew Mduduzi personally as he also lives in Jika Joe, said his death could have been avoided if the shack dwellers had been given proper RDP housing by the government. “The question we have to ask is how many lives have to be lost because of the fires and illegal connections before the issue of Jika Joe gets the attention it deserves? “The rent for the flats that they are building will not be affordable to maybe 80% of the people living here because they are reliant on social grants and piecemeal jobs.” The applicants for the flats would have to produce proof of income of between R800 and R3 500 a month. WATCH | Fire rips through Pietermaritzburg’s Jika Joe informal settlement, again Nene has lived in Jika Joe since 2012. He lost his home, spaza shop and a bakkie that he bought six months ago in Wednesday’s fire. He said he had been squatting at his brother’s place since. “When I was appointed as a councillor I decided that I was not going to leave behind the people that voted for me so I will only leave Jika Joe when they get dignified housing. Even if there’s another fire and I lose everything again, I’ll stay here.” Nene said the IFP would be reporting the issue of Wednesday’s fire to its provincial leadership because the people of Jika Joe felt let down by the fire department. He alleged that the firefighters came with empty tanks and were sitting idle for almost an hour while the inferno gutted their homes. Nene said: Msunduzi spokesperson Thobeka Mafumbatha denied the allegations that the firefighters had no water. “They said the wind was too strong so the fire was blazing and that it made it difficult for them to just go into it. The close proximity of the shacks also made the situation even more dangerous,” Mafumbatha said.