Msunduzi’s R10,6 million expenditure bill during the lockdown period raised eyebrows when the City’s leadership appeared before the parliamentary committee recently. On Thursday evening the City’s leadership went before the portfolio committee on co-operative governance and traditional affairs (Cogta) to give a progress report on the provincial government’s intervention to stabilise the municipality. The meeting came hot on the heels of the decision of the KwaZulu-Natal provincial cabinet to extend the interventions at Msunduzi, Richmond, uThukela District, Inkosi Langalibalele, uMzinyathi District, Abaqulusi and Mtubatuba until March 31. When the discussion came to Covid-19’s impact on the City, Mayor Mzimkhulu Thebolla told the committee that “the overtime, which has been a bone of contention, is just R10,6 million”. This was for the period from the start of the lockdown in March to August. Some of the members of parliament said it did not make sense that the City accumulated so much overtime during the period where some of its employees were home due to lockdown. EFF’s Hlengiwe Mkhaliphi said the allegation of corruption around Covid-19 overtime expenditure was of concern and must be investigated. “How on earth can anyone claim overtime to the tune of R10 million from April until now?” she said. City boss Madoda Khathide said most of the overtime was for security services, as the municipality had to round up the homeless who were living on the streets as per President Cyril Ramaphosa’s directives on measures to curb the spread of Covid-19. He said Msunduzi also had to provide round-the-clock security at the two homeless shelters as the occupants tried to escape at every chance they got. There were also questions about whether the money allegedly owed to former City boss Sizwe Hadebe had been recovered. Thebolla said Hadebe had not been paid anything as per the three-month salary settlement agreed upon as part of his dismissal last year. “The agreement was that whatever he owed the municipality would be deducted from there and indeed we have not paid him, chairperson.” City administrator Scelo Duma concurred with him, saying Hadebe was not paid anything because he had not provided council with a clear plan on how he intended to settle his debt.