Spring is in the air and just as we enjoy basking in the
sun, so do snakes.  With spring around the likelihood of coming across a snake
has increased and therefore Strydom says that should you ever be confronted by
a snake it is best to not make any sudden movements at first glance, which can
be hard given that most people are afraid of snakes. Strydom maintains that you should never antagonise or
approach the snake. “Stop and pause for a few seconds then move away slowly from
the snake and contact a snake catcher/expert to help with the removal of the
snake from your property. Do not, under any circumstances try and antagonise
the snake you come across as it will strike and attempt to bite you,” said
Strydom. “The most common snakes I have come across are the
variegated/spotted bush snake and the brown house snake. “Within Pietermaritzburg and the surrounding area our more
common snakes are the brown house snake, red lipped herald, variegated/spotted
bush snake, Natal green, night adder, puff adder, Mozambique spitting cobra,
black mamba, rinkhals and many more,” said Strydom. If ever bitten by a snake, Strydom says you must identify
the snake or take a picture of it so that when you seek medical attention you
can tell the medical staff what snake has bitten you so they know how to
proceed with treatment. “One of the main things to do when bitten is to keep calm so
that your heart rate remains steady to avoid extensive spreading of the venom
and seek immediate medical assistance. “Do not try sucking the venom from the snake bite or your
system as you could have open wounds in your mouth and the venom will re-enter
your system that way,” said Strydom. “Another tip my father-in-law used to give was to put up
wild bird feeders. Wild birds generally start chittering when a snake is close
by so this can act as a good alarm system,” advised Strydom. Urging the public to be aware of just how dangerous a snake
can be, Strydom says some snakes can spit far and high and can blind you. “Also, some species of snake are protected and cannot under
any circumstance be killed. Any snake you come across, please contact a snake
catcher to come and assist you to have it captured, removed and released into
the nature away from your home and from being harmed,” said Strydom. 