Four-year-old George Rafferty is making great progress in his battle with Burkitt Lymphoma. This cancer of the lymphatic system was discovered after the little fighter was admitted to Pietermaritzburg MediClinic on August 5 for tests. Biopsies and the removal of a lump confirmed the diagnosis. On August 14, George and his family, who live in the farming district of Muden, headed to the paediatric oncology centre at the Donald Gordon Medical Centre in Johannesburg, where he underwent back-to-back chemotherapy treatments. He received the first of many blood transfusions on August 24 and everything appeared to have gone smoothly. A few days later, however, George started experiencing serious side effects from the chemotherapy, which meant he had to have feeding tubes inserted and more blood transfusions. To date he has had two blood transfusions of red blood cells and one transfusion of platelets. His mum Tordi said that after a 23-day break from hospital George was currently undergoing his second cycle of chemotherapy — and the great news is that his doctor, Kate Bennett, has told the family that the cancer has not moved into his bone marrow. His tumour has also dissolved.  But the need for blood donations for George and other patients in the oncology ward remains critical. It’s also vital for women who haemorrhage due to pregnancy and other gynaecological complications, children with severe anaemia, accident victims and surgical patients. She passed this message onto friends and they have stepped up to arrange blood drives, in conjunction with the South African National Blood Service, in Greytown, New Hanover and Pietermaritzburg. Caryn Jones, who has arranged the Maritzburg event at Athlone Circle Pick n Pay from 10 am to 4 pm on Saturday, September 19, said she hoped the city’s residents would be able to match the massively successful blood drive in Greytown where 86 units were donated. There are also plans to hold another session in Dalton on September 21. The event has been organised by New Hanover Primary School, where George is a pre-primary pupil. “Over his six-to-eight-month course of treatment ahead, George will need a blood transfusion for each of his seven treatment cycles,” said Jones. “It’s not just blood, it’s life waiting to be lived and a gift that neither money can buy, nor science can create.” Describing her son as a “blessing”, Tordi said she couldn’t thank everyone enough for what they had done for her little boy. “The doctors have been truly amazing and the kindness of people has restored my faith in human nature,” she added. As for George, he just wants to get back to his farm boy passions: riding his bike, farming with his John Deere toys or quietly reading the Agrisales magazine.