Agriculture, Land Reform and Rural Development Minister Thoko Didiza on Tuesday announced an interim board for the cash-strapped Ingonyama Trust Board (ITB). While the interim board includes new members such as KZN lawyer Linda Zama and Durban businesswoman Zethu Qunta, it also returns several existing members, including its chairperson, Jerome Ngwenya, who remains at the helm, with Qunta his new deputy. According to the department, Didiza resolved to appoint the interim board after the term of the previous board expired at the end of August. “The minister has taken this decision to ensure that the current process of annual audit by the Auditor-General is not compromised as well as enabling the process of appointing the permanent board and relevant consultations to go smoothly,” said the minister’s spokesperson, Reggie Ngcobo. The ITB recently came under attack from several quarters, with rights organisations accusing it of denying rural communities, who according to the entity’s rules are not allowed to acquire a title deed for the land they currently occupy, the right to own the land. Last month women’s rights groups were angered by Ngwenya’s statement that tribal land should be exempted from the Upgrading of Land Tenure Rights Amendment (Ultra) Bill seeking to empower women to access land. The bill came before the land reform and rural development portfolio committee following a recent Constitutional Court ruling that the current legislation violated women’s rights as it only recognised males as family heads. Compounding the ITB’s woes was a report submitted to Parliament by a panel of experts led by former deputy president Kgalema Motlanthe. According to the report’s recommendations, Parliament should either repeal or amend the Ingonyama Act giving the ITB powers over tribal land. Land currently under the control of the ITB, whose sole trustee is Zulu King Goodwill Zwelithini, would be transferred to national government should Parliament approve the panel’s recommendations. The ITB, which recently announced it would be retrenching some of its employees, is currently struggling to make ends meet. Its financial position deteriorated following Didiza’s decision to withhold a R22 million allocation after it had failed to present its budget, which was due to be tabled before Parliament’s portfolio committee on rural development and land reform in October last year. While the ITB has since submitted its 2020/21 budget to the committee, MPs want the budget to be amended to reflect programmes which the board had put in place to improve the lives of KwaZulu-Natal rural communities living on the ITB’s 2,8 million hectares of land. However, the board says it would not be able to roll out the programmes as it did not have the funds.