The KwaZulu-Natal Department of Public Works’ multimillion rand property tender has pitted ANC MPL Thulani Xulu against a billionaire who loves fast cars and whose business interests are being protected by celebrity investigator Paul O’Sullivan. It all started late last month when Rebosis, the company in which billionaire Zunaid Moti is a major shareholder, discovered that it was on the verge of losing out on a lucrative Public Works office space rental tender. Rebosis, which would have made R84 million had it won the tender, found itself in the cold after the department indicated that it was about to award the tender to Upscale Property, a company owned by Xulu’s daughter, Silindile Xulu. Rebosis then requested O’Sullivan to probe Upscale Property. O’Sullivan is known for investigating the dealings of high profile people such as the late national police commissioner Jackie Selebi and convicted underworld boss Radovan Krejcir. According to O’Sullivan, Silindile’s company should not have been awarded the tender as she was merely a front for Thulani Xulu, who is the ANC Moses Mabhida Regional Task Team (RTT) convener. “The company was registered three weeks before the tender was advertised and the company had submitted a tender bid for R184 million, a difference of R104 million [R105 million] to the R79 million which Rebosis had tendered for,” he said. Moti, who owns several car dealerships, also has business interests in Zimbabwe through a mining company called Africa Chrome Fields, a subsidiary of South African mining company Fanshawe Mining Holdings. While Moti has denied it, he is perceived as a close ally of Zimbabwean President Emmerson Mnangagwa. Moti, who conceded that his investments in Zimbabwe had exposed his business to reputational risks, in May became Rebosis’s major shareholder after increasing his shareholding in the company to more than nine percent. The increase meant that Moti now has a bigger stake in Rebosis than the company’s founder, Sisa Ngebulana, whose shareholding is slightly above five percent. The Public Works Department wants to use the office space to accommodate staff from the provincial Department of Economic Development Tourism and Environmental Affairs after the lease on their current building in Jabu Ndlovu Street expired. While the Public Works Department claimed it was not aware of any irregularities in the process leading up to its decision to appoint Upscale Property, it has now referred the matter to the Treasury for a ruling. Treasury’s appeal tribunal will now hear Rebosis’s case before deciding on whether the department can go ahead and award the contract to Upscale Property. “There is a defined process of hearing that objection. We appeal for that process to run its course before any further speculation,” said provincial Public Works spokesperson Mbulelo Baloyi. While the ANC has called on party members accused of corruption to step aside, there is currently no legal provision preventing family members of MPLs from conducting business with government departments. Only in cases where an MPL has a direct influence over the awarding of government department tenders are family members barred from being allocated contracts. Meanwhile, ANC members in the Moses Mabhida region, including the party’s former regional chairperson, Alpha Shelembe, are fuming after O’Sullivan included their names in his report, which was highly publicised in the media. “I would appreciate it if it could be established whether the list of companies with our names and alleged to be involved in KZN corruption does exist ... Are these companies registered with Cipro, did they bid/tender for a contract under investigation, and their relevance on the subject matter,” Shelembe said. However, O’Sullivan said he had included the names after a Cipro search showed that they were co-directors in other companies in which Xulu has an interest. Xulu, who distanced himself from the Public Works tender, said the matter is being handled by his lawyers.