Hundreds of motor vehicle owners were left out in the cold for several hours on Tuesday morning as the motor licensing bureau in Hyslop Road failed to open its doors. People lined the road leading to the offices, with some braving the cold and rain to have their licences renewed shortly after the expiry on Monday of the extensions granted under lockdown. Transport Minister Fikile Mbalula extended the renewal date for licences a number of times to accommodate those who could not renew but according to the latest regulations, the grace period for vehicle licence discs, temporary permits and roadworthy certificates that expired between March 26 and May 31 ended on August 31. Irate vehicle owners who had queued since 6.30 am said they were not given access to the building and no one explained to them what was going on. “I was there yesterday [Monday] as number 102 in the queue. At 1 pm, when they got 100, they closed their gates and refused to attend to us, saying they had reached their quota for the day. Today, I was there from 6.30 am and was made to stand in the cold and rain for more than five hours. At 8.30 am we were told they would be opening a bit late as they were in a staff meeting. At 10 am, they still had not opened and we were told then that they were still in a meeting. I eventually left at 11 am as I could see we were getting nowhere,” said one man. Another person said he was told that they would not be opening the doors as staff were in a meeting discussing the “overwhelming number of people” they had to deal with. “We were told that staff was overwhelmed with the number of people who were queuing to have their licences renewed and that they were scared to deal with so many people and risk exposure to the virus. Then we were also told that the staff had returned to their full complement and that there were fears of a lack of social distancing among them. This is absolutely ridiculous. For every day that we are late, we have to pay on our licence. We couldn’t renew it because their departments were closed and now we have to be inconvenienced and again, pay a higher price,” said the man. Department of Transport spokesperson Kwanele Ngcalane failed to respond to a query. Other deadlines are extended to: • November 30, 2020 — Motor trade number licences that expired between March 26 and May 31; • January 31, 2021 — All learner’s licences, driving licence cards, temporary driving licences and professional driving permits that expired between March 26 and August 31.