NETWERK24 has obtained exclusive CCTV footage of the moments just before Lieutenant-Colonel Charl Kinnear (52) was shot while parked outside his house. The senior investigator in the Anti-Gang Unit was shot and killed on September 18 outside his house in Bishop Lavis in Cape Town. Kinnear had just arrived home to his his wife of 27 years Nicolette, and their two sons Carlisle (24) and Casleigh (19). While he was on his way home, his murderer received information that Kinnear was close to Bishop Lavis. He started jogging along the sidewalk towards Kinnear’s house on Gearing Street. It took the slenderly-built man, clad in a red hoodie and Adidas tracksuit pants, about 10 minutes to jog to Gearing Street, where CCTV cameras again recorded images of him. He is seen strolling past several children with his hands behind his back near Kinnear’s house. Kinnear’s was still sitting in his car outside his house when the hitman arrived, waiting for his son Carlisle to move a vehicle so that he could drive into the property. At 3.02 pm the shooter appeared again on Kinnear’s CCTV cameras. He was walking head down with his hands behind his back on the pavement opposite Kinnear’s home. While Kinnear’s son moved a car out of the way, the shooter quickly crossed the road to Kinnear’s car. The next images show him at the driver’s side of Kinnear’s car pointing a pistol. Kinnear was reportedly shot more than fives times. Most of the shots were to his chest. He died on the scene. Netwerk24 reported on September 19 that Kinnear’s cellphone had been tracked for weeks before he was murdered. It was also reported that he was targeted for his investigation into the illegal issuing of firearm licences at Gauteng police stations. In the weeks before his murder he was working in Springs on the East Rand, investigating police involvement in gun smuggling in support of organised crime. He was said to have been ready to arrest senior police officers in connection with a gun smuggling network. Detectives arrested Zane Kilian (39) on September 22. He was reportedly the man who tracked Kinnear’s cellphone. Kilian appeared in the Bishop Lavis magistrate court on charges murder, of conspiracy to murder, and illegally intercepting communication. The case was remanded to October 5 for further investigation. Netwerk24 also reported that Kinnear had investigated the role of Nafiz Modack, one of the alleged role players in Cape Town’s underworld, in the gun smuggling. Modack and 20 other suspects were arrested in June and appeared in the Kempton Park Magistrate’s Court on June 17. They were charged with fraud, defeating the ends of justice and transgressions of the Firearms Control Act. — Netwerk24