   Athletics in KwaZulu-Natal was already aflame before the
wind of Covid-19 fanned the flames. For the second consecutive reign, the
president was removed in 2019, with Athletics South Africa (ASA) putting the
provincial body under administration. The clubs identified a task team in the hope of containing
the burn, but the winds of Covid-19 that fanned the flames, effectively closed
down the sport. We can see the ashes of the sport, and the lack of life
blood: gone were the percentages of entry fees, temporary licences and other
financial streams, resulting in the shutdown of many organs, and structural
deterioration. The clock is ticking for the administration of the sport. In reality, the athletics governance in the province has
never really worked for over four decades. Irrespective of the vilification or
honouring of presidents they have all been forced to drink from a poisoned
chalice. KwaZulu-Natal is the geographical size of UK, and hampered
administratively with the only major centres on the coast and one third of
inland distance. Also read: 2020 Mandela Day Marathon cancelled due to coronavirus Hosting truly representative meetings has been impossible.
In the 1980s the pre-unification Natal Marathon Road-running Association (NMRA)
not only moved AGMs to Botha’s Hill, but also wrote a clause to cater for below
quorum meetings giving a 15-minute delay. The rare subsequent quorums have been
when removing presidents or major controversies. Other large political provinces of Western Cape (Boland,
Western Province and South West Districts), Eastern Cape (Transkei, Border and
Eastern Province) and even Gauteng (Central Gauteng, Northern Gauteng and Vaal
Triangle) were split athletically into manageable trios. During political and
sporting unification KZN Athletics (KZNA) 
was kept in one unified block for good reason. This renders the province
unmanageable, making full and fair representative elections impractical. Like the Phoenix, Henry Ford acknowledged that rebirth is an
optional outcome of disaster, stating: “Failure is the opportunity to start
again more intelligently.” With only the administrator, task team and a depleted office
ticking over, now is the opportunity to redesign KZNA “more intelligently” and
we can thank Covid-19 for introducing the power of Zoom/virtual meetings. With
World Athletics (WA) recently restructured, which ASA and provinces have always
committed to mirror, a completely new structure could bring three to four
regions using district boundaries. Each region could follow WA with a three- or five-person
board, and a Competition Commission creating regional governance, and a small
local office providing administration and implementation for the immediate
period. A couple of representatives from each region could be on
monthly Zoom board meetings, with similar provincial Competition Commission
meetings that primarily deal with policy and planning for the following year to
five years ahead. A president, two vice presidents and a provincial administrator
would be elected and appointed independently. As with WA, the board could be augmented with a few co-opted
members to ensure the correct business skills are available at that level. With Zoom, even provincial council meetings could be held
every three months, and AGMs would be easily arranged, could be fully open to
observers, with two club representatives accredited and activated to speak and
vote. The quadrennial general and election meeting may be the only one
requiring in- person attendance. Effectively the provincial board would look to future
planning while regions deal with the current 12-14 months on a rolling basis. A
key introduction at World level has been the Athlete Integrity Unit, which not
only deals with doping control, but screens every person before they can stand
for election or employment. This was also proposed for all sports in an open webinar
with the minister of sport this past month. A move like this would provide
credibility and confidence to members, organisations and potential sponsors. This is just one option and thought based around the
provincial history and experience, while aligning to the principles of the new
WA structure. All affiliated KZNA clubs and members have been invited to
put forward proposals for constitutional change by October 30. Please e-mail
dees@kznathletics.co.za With KZNA being under administration, and World Athletics’
new structure, Covid-19 has presented the province with an amazing opportunity. Let face it, like the Phoenix, our body is dead, burnt with
only ashes remaining, now more than any other time, we have an opportunity to
rise triumphantly. The opportunity is not to tinker with existing
constitutions, but to first focus on a new “more intelligent” workable
structure relevant for the next decade. The constitution is then written to the
structure, not the other way around.