Former president Jacob Zuma’s close ally, Thoshan Panday, has lost his bid to stop his prosecution for fraud and corruption linked to the 2010 Fifa Football World Cup. Pietermaritzburg High Court Judge Trevor Gorven on Wednesday dismissed an application to review former prosecutions boss Shaun Abrahams’ decision on January 26, 2018 to prosecute Panday in several cases. A year before, the KZN prosecuting boss at the time, Moipone Noko, declined to prosecute in all the matters. One relates to Panday allegedly trying to bribe former KZN Hawks boss Johan Booysen. Judge Gorven said in his judgment that Abrahams’ decision was to prosecute Panday along with police officers Colonel Navin Madhoe and Captain Ashwin Narainpershad. The trio allegedly defrauded the SAPS. This concerned the supply of temporary accommodation to members of the SAPS during the Fifa World Cup, said the judge. The investigations went “anything but smoothly” and spawned three further dockets. The first case alleges interference in the investigation in the main case. The national head of the Directorate for Priority Crime Investigation (the DPCI), Lieutenant-General Anwa Dramat, had requested a progress report from Booy­sen in the investigation in the main case, said the judge. Booysen said he had been instructed by the KZN SAPS provincial commissioner, Lieutenant-General Mmamonnye Ngobeni, to abandon the investigation. However, added the judge, Dramat instructed that the investigation should continue. The case was opened concerning the alleged actions of Ngobeni. The second case also has to do with alleged interference. The allegation is that Madhoe — on Panday’s behalf — attempted to bribe Booysen to quash the main case. An undercover operation was launched on September 8, 2011, which allegedly resulted in Madhoe handing Booysen R1,43 million in cash. It led to the arrest of Madhoe. The third case arose from allegations that Panday fraudulently attempted to secure the unfreezing of funds, which he claimed were payable to him by the SAPS and which were the subject of the main case. The judge added that the first ground of attack on the legality of the decisions to prosecute was that Abrahams failed to consult Noko before reviewing her decision. The second ground was a failure of rationality. This related to recordings of intercepted communications which were obtained following a judge’s order. Judge Gorven said that Panday accepted that, prior to Abrahams’ decision, an exchange of correspondence took place between Abrahams and Noko. She had the opportunity to motivate her decision to decline to prosecute, he said. Panday’s contention that Abrahams was not legally empowered under the Act to review her decision, does not hold good, said the judge. He added that Abrahams was empowered to review Noko’s decision. Judge Gorven found that Panday’s submission that the intercepted material was needed by Abrahams to make a rational decision, “cannot be sustained”. No case had been made out that the decision lacked rationality, he said. The judge explained more about the intercepted material. It arose from concerns raised by Brigadier Laurence Kemp, head of the KZN SAPS Provincial Financial Services at the time. His concerns were aroused by the amount spent on SAPS accommodation procurement in the 2009/2010 financial year. Apart from the fact that R55 million was expended that year, only a single agent had been used to obtain quotations. Most expenditure benefitted Goldcoast Trading CC, which is allegedly linked to Panday. It also appeared that invoices had been substantially inflated over the actual cost of accommodation, said the judge. In addition, it appeared that invoices had been split into amounts of less than R200 000 so as to avoid the need for a full procurement process and the scrutiny attendant on it. The invoices were allegedly approved by Madhoe, to whom payments were also allegedly made. Kemp’s discoveries were discussed at a meeting in early May 2010. In October 2010, one of the investigating officers claimed to have received threatening telephone calls related to the investigation. This, said the judge, was communicated to General Deena Moodley of Crime Intelligence. An application was brought under the Interception Act based on these allegations. On November 15, 2010, a judge authorised that certain communications could be intercepted. “The gravamen of the complaint is that unauthorised interceptions of his communications with his attorney breached attorney-client privilege. Because this disclosed his defences, any subsequent trial would result in a failure of justice,” said the judge. Panday said in his affidavit that in the intercepted material “we were heard to be discussing the merits of my criminal case under Cas 781 (the main case) as well as the approaches we would use in defence of the charges and the search and seizure operation which had been conducted by the police in relation to Cas 781.” The judge added that the material relates to the second case concerning attempts to improperly influence the outcome of the investigation in the main case. The judge added that the NDPP does not intend to use any of that material as evidence in the main case.