Problem plastic, which cannot be recycled, is being transformed into paving stones for gardens and patios. The project is one of several new initiatives set up by the non-profit organisation ImagineIf, founded by Dr Andrew Venter, Chris Whyte and Siphokazi Putini, which has taken over the running of the recycling villages in Howick, Hilton and the Liberty Midlands Mall in Pietermaritzburg. During lockdown piles of recyclables were left at the depot, near Midmar Dam, and it’s taken operations duo Noluvuyo Sixholo and Yashna Maharajh and their team months to return the site to a good state. They also managed to collect for processing 270 tons of paper, plastic, cans, glass and cardboard in July and August, when the government lifted restrictions on recycling. In addition to the items brought to the ImagineIf depot at Midmar from the three recycling villages, there are also domestic collections from retirement villages in Howick and eco-waste from businesses and schools in the area, which pay ImagineIf a small fee to collect it. At the depot, staff sort the recyclables into different streams, which in the case of plastic can be up to six or seven different types. “There is LD [which includes plastic bags and bubblewrap], PET, which includes things like plastic bottles, which we separate into green, clear and brown; and then we have HD plastic,” Maharajh said.  The latter is sent to Envirotimbers in Howick, which processes it into a range of outdoor furniture. Central Waste, meanwhile, collects bales of other recyclables, with PET bottles being sent to Johannesburg for processing and glass to Consol. The biggest challenge facing the recycling sector, however, is that prices have dropped to levels last seen a decade ago. Using PET clear bottles, which are considered the benchmark in terms of value, Venter said they were only getting R2/kg for clear bottles, down from R5 or R6/kg in January 2019. By contrast it cost ImagineIf R1,75/kg to collect, sort, crush and bale recyclable waste in July and August. “If we look at our revenue generated in the past two months, we brought in R200 000, but our operating costs were R450 000,” Venter said. “We are hopeful, however, that with the green paver project, we will be able to start seeing an increase in revenue.” He added government plans to introduce a levy on companies that use unrecyclable plastics to package goods would be a definite plus for the industry.  ImagineIf has donor funding in place to be able to employ 30 full-time and 15 part-time staff at the depot, but for now the non-profit organisation needs to deal with the backlog of material on the site and improve its systems and machinery for processing it. Set to go on-stream this week is a new green paver machine, designed by Duncan Doo, from The Pyrolysis Group in Durban. It takes problem plastics, like chip packets, dog and cat food packaging and refills for dishwashing soap and detergents, and turns them into paving stones. Glass is added to a plastic mix to create structure in much the same way stone adds strength to concrete. “About two years ago Duncan started messing around with melting plastics and combining that with glass to make pavers,” Venter said. “That journey has led to the installation of two new paver machines at the depot site.” The new machines have larger meltpots and a more efficient mixing and heating zone inside the blender to minimise energy costs. A scrubber on the top of the machine reduces emissions to ensure the process is as eco-friendly as possible. “We are hoping that the performance will be three or four times what we had before,” Doo said, adding that it was vital to find a way to upcycle plastic that no one has a solution for. “With the new machines, we should be able to process between 1 000 kg to 1 500 kg of unrecyclable plastic each day,” Venter said. “We are also looking to establish a network of micro enterprises in our townships where people who collect and sell plastics can buy pavers and sell them in their own communities.”