Msunduzi Municipality has been allocated an additional R88,9 million by the National Treasury, which brings its equitable share to R682,4 million. A large proportion of this will go to the roads department, the landfill site and electricity projects, but most will be spent on Covid-19 costs. On Monday the chief financial officer, Nelisiwe Ngcobo, told the financial services portfolio committee that the additional funding was part of the national government’s Covid-19 relief to municipalities, whose revenues have fallen due to poor collection during the lockdown, as most of their ratepayers and residents could not afford to pay. This resulted in the City having to adjust its 2020/21 budget that came to effect in July as its revenue has increased from R5,9 billion to just over R6 billion. In his report that came before the committee City’s senior budget manager, Sifiso Khoza said the equitable share was paid into the municipal bank account in three tranches — in July, December and March. Among the 2020/21 budget adjustments that Msunduzi had to make as a result of this additional allocation was to increase its expenditure from R5,51 billion to R5,56 billion. The anticipated surplus also increased by 11,5% from R401,3 million to R443,7 million. Ngcobo said about 45,8% of the additional equitable share was allocated to the capital budget with a focus on service delivery. The roads department, landfill site, electricity projects as well as community halls would get R10 million each; R1,1 million would be used by stores for spares. “The remainder of the subsidy is allocated to operational requirements to cover Covid-19 costs and other incidental costs.” While committee was unanimous in welcoming the additional funding, the DA was concerned that Msunduzi had become a grant-dependent municipality. DA caucus leader Sibongiseni Majola said if Msunduzi had registered all its indigent households it would have received a bigger allocation of the equitable share. He said was disappointed to note that the budget adjustment did not include plans to increase revenue such as the billing the areas that were not paying for municipal services. “We will still be collecting from a very small portion of our customers living within the boundary of our municipality. “The traffic violation and bylaw infringements penalties are still at R1 million for the whole financial year yet there are transgressions every second in this municipality.” DA’s Ross Strachan said they would not be surprised if the auditor-general later found that the equitable share had been spent irregularly. “We are not supporting this because of our track record of implementing budgets that are not realistic and in terms of our administration not monitoring the fact that we’ve got so much irregular expenditure,” he said. Mayor Mzimkhulu Thebolla accused the DA of contradicting itself by saying they accepted the additional funding but did not support the budget adjustment. He said the City could not spend the funds without adding it to 2020/21 budget. “Of course we need to find a way on how best we can deal with the areas that are not billed, if they need to be rezoned so that they become residential then we can bill them … Also we need an investigation on the affluent areas that are bypassing meters and not paying for services,” said Thebolla. ANC’s Sunny Naidoo said he was glad to see that the bulk of the equitable share would be going towards service delivery. His sentiments were echoed by his colleague, Thamsanqa Sithole, who said the additional funding should help the municipality respond to the needs of the people. “Perhaps I should remind councillors that waste is a reputation killer for the municipality,” he added.