Electricity outages in the Phayiphini area in Mpumuza have been blamed for the spike in the attacks on the elderly, with criminals hiding under the veil of darkness when they target their victims. This follows the murder of a 78-year-old woman during a power outage in the area on Monday night. The area had been without electricity since Sunday at around 5 pm. Lydia Zuma’s body was discovered by her granddaughter in an outside bedroom on Tuesday morning. She had suffered a big wound above her left eye. The family said they suspect she was beaten with a sharp object, which might have resulted in her death. Nombuyiselo Zuma, the granddaughter who discovered her body, told The Witness on Wednesday that they have been left with many unanswered questions as to what really happened. She said she made the shocking discovery when she went to wake her grandmother up. “My grandmother used to sleep alone in the outside bedroom and I sleep in another bedroom in the main house. I usually go and wake her up after I have prepared breakfast for her. On Tuesday morning I went to her bedroom as usual, but when I knocked there was no response. “After a couple of minutes knocking I realised there was something wrong. The door was still locked from the inside. I then went to the window and removed everything that we normally use to close the hole in the window, and that is when I made this shocking discovery. “She was lying on her bed, her face facing down on the side where she was wounded. I called the neighbours to come and help me since I was the only one who was living with her,” she said. Zuma said they had to break the lock on the door to gain access to the bedroom where her grandmother was. “We still do not know how it happened because the door was locked in the morning, but what I am sure about is that when she went to sleep she was perfectly fine. What makes things even more difficult about this whole situation is that it happened when the lights were off. If we had electricity maybe this would not have happened or someone would have seen something.” The Witness was also informed that this was not the first incident that has happened when the lights have been off in the area. Last week another elderly woman was attacked in her home and strangled while there was no electricity, but fortunately she managed to scream and she was assisted. Resident Jabulile Mthalane said elderly people living in the area no longer feel safe. “We are very heartbroken by this incident. We do not feel safe now because we fear that we also may be attacked while the lights are off.” Police spokesperson Mthokozisi Ngobese said police are investigating a case of murder. No one has been arrested.