The survivor of a massacre that killed eight people in an apparent historical feud in KwaZulu-Natal is in hiding.Five people, including a baby, were later shot dead in the area of Taylor's Halt in Pietermaritzburg.The sole survivor has spoken of his fear.   The survivor of the first fatal attack in last week’s massacre at Taylor’s Halt has fled the area and is now in hiding, fearing for his life. Ayanda Sishi, Lawrence "Juju" Zondi and Sboniso Ndawo were shot dead last Wednesday afternoon, but the survivor got away with a wound to his buttock. That evening, five members of another family - Ncamisile Nxele, 70, Thobeka Nxele, 24, Thandolwethu Nxele, 1, Sphilela, 12, and Zodwa Nxele, 61 — were all shot dead in what may have been retaliation in a historical feud. The sole survivor of the attacks has now spoken for the first time of his fear. Speaking to The Witness he said: He did not want to get into details about what happened. He is currently recovering from the injuries and still getting medical attention. Relatives of the victims also said that they are living in fear since no one has been arrested for the murders. Nightmare Hlalisile Thusi, a member of the Nxele family, told The Witness that their lives have been turned into a nightmare. "We are scared and we do not feel safe at all because these people who attacked our family are still roaming in the streets. "We do not know who are they are going to attack next. We do not know whether they are going to come back and attack us as well or what. The life we are living now is painful. "If these people are arrested it will give us hope about our lives being at risk. We want to see justice being served for our family members that were killed and for our safety as well," she said. Thusi said they have all left the home where the incident took place out of fear. Vuma Zondi, who lost his brother Lawrence in the first shooting, said they are not happy with how the police are handling the case. He said their family have also gone into hiding in fear of being attacked. "We are heartbroken. I lost my brother, I am still mourning but at the same time I have to look over my shoulder all the time because I do not know if I am the next target for these criminals. "We want police to work hard in the investigating these cases and make arrests so that we can get our lives back," he said. KZN police spokesperson Brigadier Jay Naicker confirmed no one has been arrested. Police are still investigating.