Operations at funeral parlours and mortuaries in the city were disrupted on Monday amid threats of violence if they opened their doors. A threatening WhatsApp voice note had demanded that all funeral parlours and mortuaries shut down from yesterday till tomorrow, partly to demand Covid relief funds from government. “We will show you that we don’t play games. Make sure your vehicles are parked. They will get what’s coming. We are prepared to die for the cause,” are some of the threats made on the menacing voice note. ALSO READ: Burials concern as industry faces 3-day forced shutdown KwaZulu-Natal police spokesperson Captain Nqobile Gwala said no incidents were reported in Pietermaritzburg. She said in Durban about 25 owners and employees embarked on a protest near the Gale Street mortuary, but they eventually dispersed. Although there was no violent action in the city, some funeral parlours were closed, while others only allowed walk-ins. Owners who spoke to The Witness on Monday on condition of anonymity said they were taking the threats very seriously, which is why they decided not to operate as normal. One owner said they decided to close everything as they were fearing for their safety. “We opened the offices in the morning but when we saw that other funeral services were closing we also did the same for our safety. Our aim for opening in the first place was to do admin and allow walk-ins, but we decided otherwise when we saw others closing. While some decided to totally close their offices and mortuaries, others decided to trade for walk-ins. “We are not going out to fetch or transport any bodies from today [Monday] until Wednesday. We have informed our clients that we will start operating fully on Thursday. “We decided to only allow walk-ins because these threats are very serious and we cannot afford to be attacked. None of our cars are going out, it is only office work,” he said. Another owner said he was also only doing office work and not operating outside the office due to fear. The voice note follows a notice issued last Wednesday by the the Unification Task Team (UTT) to the funeral industry that there would be a national shutdown. The UTT said it was made up of funeral associations and forums. Its list of demands is lengthy and includes wanting government to allocate a Covid-19 relief fund for the funeral industry with immediate effect. However, the Funeral Industry Reformed Association (Fira) has distanced itself from the strike action. It has also encouraged parlours to lay charges of intimidation and seek protection when removing bodies from the place of death, if the need arises. The KwaZulu-Natal Department of Health was not available for comment regarding the operations of mortuaries in public hospital. 