Msunduzi is swooping on defaulting debtors and has obtained a warrant of execution for a Hayfields property that is in arrears, with an auction set to take place in November. This is the first property that has been attached as part of the City’s enforcement of its credit control measures to deal with its runaway debtors book that has crippled its finances as it sat at around R4 billion. The property in question is a 1 0876-hectare vacant plot owned by Pegma 125 Investment CC. The company owed Msunduzi more than R226 000 and their account was among the top defaulters handed over to a panel of debt collectors. Attempts to get comment from Pegma were unsuccessful. READ MORE | Debt collectors are coming for you - Msunduzi Municipality owed R4bn Msunduzi spokesperson Ntobeko Ngcobo said this was the first property to reach this stage of execution but there would be more such matters, if consumers did not heed the warning to pay their debts. “Summonses have been issued in most of the cases handed over to debt collectors and default judgments are being sought for non-defended matters.” In January The Witness reported that Msunduzi had appointed 24 debt collectors to assist in recovering the money owed for rates and municipal services. The municipality handed over the accounts of 67 000 customers, with a total value of more than R1,8 billion, whose debts had been in arrears for more than four months and disconnection of services had not yielded positive results. In his recent presentation before the parliamentary portfolio committee on cooperative governance and traditional affairs, Mayor Mzimkhulu Thebolla said between December and June 2020 more than R98,2 million was collected by debt collectors from accounts handed over, of which R13,5 million (13,8%) was paid to them in commissions the same period. “The most collected was R23 million in January,” he said. Thebolla said the payments during the lockdown period had been less than “very low”. In April R5 million was collected, a slight improvement in May of R10 million, then a decrease to R8 million in June but then it picked up again in July when R11,9 million was collected. Thebolla said: Ngcobo said consumers facing financial constraints should not just stop paying for services as that would result in legal action being taken against them. She said they were urged to come forward and make payment arrangements before it got to the stage where their properties would be executed for debt. “In the absence of any formal arrangement or if the arrangements are not honoured the credit control measures will be enforced. “The enforcement of credit control measures will result in the supply of municipal services being suspended and disconnected and handing over of accounts to debt collectors, which could lead to defaulters having their properties attached,” said Ngcobo. At least 4 000 of the City’s customers who signed agreements to make monthly payments on their debts have defaulted several times, resulting in some being disconnected. This has largely been blamed on the financial impact of Covid-19 on households and businesses. Ngcobo said consumers qualifying for the indigent status must submit their applications and those who had queries on their bill must also come forward so that the dispute resolution committee could conclude the outstanding queries. Ngcobo said account holders could also request their account statements via e-mail at billing@msunduzi.gov.za or on WhatsApp at 083 423 9887.