Msunduzi mayor Mzimkhulu Thebolla looked to the year ahead when he presented his report on his first 12 months in office on Tuesday. The presentation, which would have been made to a packed City Hall had it not been for Covid-19, was done on virtual and social media platforms. Thebolla started by unpacking some of the achievements made by his executive committee since its appointment last August. Amongst them is good governance, as council and its committees now sit for regular meetings that are not deliberately collapsed by aggrieved ANC councillors. He said the City is also making progress in addressing negative audit findings that haunted Msunduzi for the past three financial years. He said 70% of the 2018/19 qualification findings have been addressed and the aim now is to get a positive outcome when the auditor-general assesses the books for 2019/20, which ended in June. The filling of critical vacancies, especially those in management, has helped improve the City’s capacity and restored the culture of accountability and work ethic, he said. While acknowledging that more work still needs to be done in terms of waste management, which has been a bone of contention between Msunduzi and residents for the past three years, Thebolla said there has been some noticeable improvement. The City has set aside funding to improve this department and some of the investment will also be going to the New England Road landfill site to help extend its lifespan as well as unlock some of the “green economy” opportunities that neighbouring communities can benefit from. “Anyone who’s been in the CBD can attest that it’s looking much better than it was yesterday in terms of cleanliness.” The mayor committed to ensure that the City sustains this, saying it is one of the main priorities because of its direct impact on Msunduzi’s ability to attract investment. “A dirty city chases away investors. A dirty city chases away even businesses that are already there, which results in a fewer job opportunities for our residents.” He said in the coming weeks the municipality will announce its rejuvenation plans and pending business investments. On the other targets for the last year of his term, Thebolla said potholes are being dealt with in different parts of Pietermaritzburg. “Our target is also to make sure that all our street lights are working and we provide uninterrupted power supply to our communities.” The biggest challenge is electricity theft, which results in regular power interruptions, he said. Thebolla praised residents of France and the Village for taking a stand against illegal connections.