When Small was marooned on our little lockdown island many many months ago, he could just about manage to crawl. By the time he took a repatriation flight back to Germany with his father and mother, our daughter, he was a passable biped. How did this period wire his emotions? And mine? A planned six-week family holiday in South Africa, with three weeks to visit the Cape relatives and three allocated for us here in the kingdom, ended up as seven months in exile. Lockdown was imposed while they were still wandering along the wine route, and for a long time we thought we would be saying goodbye without having said hello to our only grandchild. When the week-long window for travel was opened, they took the gap, arriving here on my birthday, and as if to welcome them, Barbara the lamb was born that evening. Barbara’s big and weaned now. The gashes where the firebreaks were burned are spring-green again. The plantation where I walked more than a hundred dawns with Small in his comfy-carrier has been felled. The duiker we’d see from time to time has sought refuge over the hill. So too has the puff adder I missed by a millimetre on an autumn run. Was that before lockdown or after? I’ve cultivated (or rather uncultivated) a Hemingway look, but the beard has delusions of Noah now. I miss feeling shaven, but not the shaving. I have not been ostracised for it. These are unsettled times and what might otherwise have been unalloyed moments of joy have been tempered with anxious thoughts. What, I’d wonder as we set off on our daily walk, if I trip and break a hip; will anyone hear the baby’s cries? Will the dogs lie and wait with me or seek help? Every step was measured as a result, surely placed. And yet one morning, when the loggers had just started barking, a Eucalypt tentacle lying across the path snared my ankle. An acrobatic twist kept us vertical but I remember thinking how ironic to be worrying about a virus only to be laid low by clumsiness. I remember thinking too how much Small’s safety depended on my care. How acutely aware we have become of our reciprocal health and wellbeing since the virus first popped up in Hilton, at my doctor’s surgery just down the way. Normally there are three generations of us in the household. Our foibles are mostly tolerated, and we enjoy the relations of give and take. Small’s family made it four generations, and he benefited from an excess of attention and being bounced around from uncle to gogo to great gogo. Nothing feels burdensome when there’s someone to hand over to when energy fades. But on the flip side, when my wife got Covid-19, our strength became our weakness. Self-isolation is all fine and well, but you know the enemy has breached your defences and so you wait for the next strike. We couldn’t all decamp, and a certain panic set in for a while. There was no quick fix, in any sense, and so thoughts turned to little things and the long view. Every day had its little routine. How many night feeds? How many sleeps in the day? Poos? Is that grunt an embellishment on yesterday’s groan? One step. Five. Suddenly there’s more walking than crawling. Soon he will be in his 20s and somewhere deep in his psyche he’ll remember the cry of the hadeda. Will it make him melancholy, or invigorate him as it does me? Will this bubble in time have planted a way of being in him, of valuing family, community, care and a faith in himself that will allow him to stay steady in a world that looks set to be hot and bumpy and very, very violent? Having stared every day over such a long period at our own mortality has inevitably raised all at once all the moral and philosophical issues we tease out over lifetimes. Reduced from a world of infinite possibility to our very small lives in which the pebbles of daily routine have turned smooth in our hands, we have learned, or relearned, how to take delight in performing our duties. The common-senses with which we entered this year have all been tested, and many make no more sense at all. Much as our lives start feeling normal again, and familiar, there is a sense that the social and political template has shifted ineffably, and that any rewiring that we managed to engineer this year will be needed for what’s to come. Small turned one at the weekend. His mother wishes for him that he be “a kind person, patient and focused, with a sense of humour, delighting in life around him as he does already”. Lockdown has put a strain on these qualities in all of us, but as we ease up they are starting to glimmer again.