At least 19 izinduna have been killed in KwaZulu-Natal since
January last year, apparently over their positions as some now view it as a job
opportunity. “We are being slaughtered with no justice all just for a
measly R10 000 a month,” said Induna Phakamani Dlamini from Richmond. Dlamini is also the secretary of Ubumbano Lwezinduna, which
is an association of izinduna with 3 000 members scattered across KZN. Last year the violence against izinduna also claimed the
life of the leader of Ubumbano, Vusi Mthethwa, and the latest victim was
Jabulani Nxumalo who was gunned down in uMkhanyakude, in northern KZN on
Thursday evening. Cato Ridge’s Mthethwa, who died in a hail of bullets in
November, was vocal on the issues of izinduna’s salaries and the controversial
R1,4 billion back pay owed to them since 2013. Dlamini said there was never any violence directed at
izinduna when this was just a voluntary position but since they started getting
salaries some started seeing it as a job opportunity. “When we were earning R1 300 no one even paid attention to
us but then last year our stipend was increased to R10 000 and that’s when the
violence started. We don’t think it’s a coincidence. We’ve not just had
izinduna being killed but we’ve also had the emergence of cases of people
trying to forcefully remove izinduna from their positions, something that was
unheard of before.” He also alleged some former politicians also now wanted to
become izinduna because they no longer held positions of influence in their
communities. “They are mobilising communities against izinduna to try and
force them to step down and we now know that if you don’t vacate the position
you are likely to get killed because these people want the so-called power that
comes with being induna.” Dlamini said Ubumbano had reported the alleged illegal
removal of izinduna to the KZN Department of Cooperative Governance and
Traditional Affairs (Cogta) but had not received  assistance. Another induna who spoke to Weekend Witness from a hospital
bed in the South Coast on Sunday said he knew he had a target on his back
before last week’s attack that left him with gunshot wounds on the arm and the
face. He was travelling with three others in the car when another
vehicle sped up as if it was overtaking before the occupants opened fire at
them. “We’re lucky to be alive but we don’t know if we will survive next time
because chances are they’re coming back to finish the job ... There’s nothing I
can do but wait for that day,” he said. He said most of the izinduna were not only living in fear
but also with depression. “We’re burying our friends and colleagues every other
week and some are now living with disabilities because of this violence. That
takes its toll on a person,” he said wistfully. Dlamini said most of the izinduna had already told Ubumbano
about their plans to step down but were only holding on until they received
their back pay. “We’re really aggrieved on how this has been dealt with and
izinduna fear that they will not get their money if they step down now because
we’ve not received such commitment from government but now it seems we are
going to die without it and it might not even be given to our families.” He said according to the KZN provincial government the
payment of izinduna was an unfunded mandate. “It’s a real concern for us
because we know that they’ve made several attempts to get the funding but none
have been successful.” Cogta Spokesperson for the KZN Cogta, Senzelwe Mzila, said he
could comment on whether there was a conspiracy to murder izinduna over their
positions. “These are serious claims that would need to be escalated to
relevant law enforcement agencies as a matter of urgency by complainants.” On the allegation that Cogta has turned a blind eye to the
reports of the “illegal” removal of izinduna, Mzila said an induna served at
the pleasure of the chief. He said proper disciplinary processes needed to be
followed whenever an induna was accused of misconduct. “An induna can only be dismissed after a formal disciplinary
process which is processed through the MEC.” Mzila said the department continued to engage all
stakeholders with a view to coming up with a solution to the issue of the
backpay. However, he could not say when they izinduna were likely to get their
money or give the commitment that the families of those that had since died
would be given their share.