Municipal Public Accounts Committee (Mpac) chair Mary Schalkwyk on the challenges the committee facesMsunduzi does not have the finances to do all it should, partly due to non-payment for servicesMpac warned council of issues that would land it in administration  “When you, the community, turn a blind eye to theft of municipal services you’re actually letting those people rob you, because it’s you that’s paying for that water and electricity at the end of the day.” So said chairperson of Msunduzi’s council watchdog, the Municipal Public Accounts Committee (Mpac), Mary Schalkwyk, in an interview with The Witness. The issue of theft of water and electricity has been on Mpac’s agenda for several years as a result of the committee members’ concern about its cost to the municipality, which runs to more than R200 million annually. Schalkwyk said continuous appeals for Msunduzi residents to report illegal connections had largely fallen on deaf ears because of the public’s assumption that it was the municipality footing the bill for bulk services. She said this was also the misconception around the blatant thuggery when it came to the vandalism and theft of municipal infrastructure. “Inasmuch as the municipality is a custodian, that infrastructure is owned by the community because they pay for it. It’s the same with water and electricity, you pay for it and the municipality then uses that money to pay Eskom and Umgeni Water,” she said. She said the non-payment by ratepayers was also the reason Msunduzi was sitting with a R4 billion debt and could not discharge services as it should. “Hence you see the roads are not properly fixed, half the time the street lights are off and there isn’t adequate water provision due to bursting pipes because of ageing infrastructure.” She said the municipality did not have enough money to replace ageing infrastructure and the grants it received were inadequate — even though there were also concerns that those grants were not spent on time due to poor planning by officials. Schalkwyk, who was appointed as chairperson after the 2016 municipal elections, admitted that her term had not been an easy one. She said since a reshuffle of council and committees last August, things had stabilised and they were now able to go on site visits. “Our responsibility as Mpac is to make sure that the money that is put in the municipality is spent where it’s supposed to go — we are the watchdog,” she said. 'Not fully effective' She conceded that Mpac had not been fully effective in this regard as there had been a disjuncture where the municipal integrated development plan — which outlines the projects planned — was passed before the budget only to later find a glaring difference between the two. Schalkwyk described as unfortunate the fact that Msunduzi was placed under administration during her term. She said the things that were laid out by then-MEC Nomusa Dube-Ncube as having led to this were first outlined in Mpac’s 2017 oversight report. “The report stated every reason that could see the municipality going back to where it was in 2011 where it was under administration. Sadly those recommendations by Mpac were ignored and the municipality was subsequently placed under administration again — not without caution, not without warning but with continuous engagement with officials who continuously brought up different excuses as to why things were not happening the way that they were supposed to,” said Schalkwyk. Some of the issues raised by Mpac also later came up in the auditor-general’s report as areas of qualification. Schalkwyk said this was very frustrating because that could have been avoided through the implementation of the committee’s recommendations. “The saddest part is that it took something like three years for some of the recommendations [from the 2016/17 annual report] to be adhered to and not even fully. Most have still not been attended to,” she said. She said another reason Msunduzi was in the position it was in was the lack of synergy between the departments.  Schalkwyk said the initiatives introduced by the recently-appointed City boss, Madoda Khathide, gave her hope that one day the issues raised by Mpac would be addressed. She believes she won’t be returning to council after next year’s local government election. She joked that being an Mpac chair was an exit card for any councillor. She said serving as a councillor for two terms had been an honour and she was grateful to the ANC for giving her the responsibility as it broadened her mind. She said she was looking forward to returning to her roots as a community worker, which she did for decades before joining council nearly a decade ago. “I’m passionate about early childhood development and educating young people because I believe giving our children the right foundation will help them have a brighter future. “Education is the greatest tool we have to fight not only poverty but also the scourge of drug addiction amongst our youth. 