A 38-year-old Northdale man was savagely mauled by his neighbour’s boerboel, sustaining 47 puncture wounds. The attack occurred on Tuesday morning when unemployed Shamil Hoosen was on the boundary of his Wayside Place property in Northdale after his neighbour’s dog managed to worm through a locked gate. The incident follows on the heels on another attack on Monday, when three-year-old Christopher van der Merwe died after he was attacked by a pair of pitbulls at the home of his parents’ friend in Glenwood. “It was horrific. Shamil was on his property, speaking to the neighbour’s wife and daughter as they run a tuckshop and he wanted to buy a box of matches. “The boerboel managed to squeeze through their locked gate and pounced on him. He fell to the ground but tried to fight the vicious dog off, to no avail. “He tried to grab the dog’s collar to avoid his face being mauled and the neighbour’s wife and daughter managed to put a piece of wood between the dog and the Shamil’s face to stop it from attacking him there. There was just no stopping the frenzied dog. It was hell-bent on finishing him off. The dog’s jaws locked onto Shamil’s arm and no one could even pull the dog off. “Eventually someone had to put a rope through the dog’s collar and pull it off Shamil. If that didn’t happen, the dog would never have stopped,” said Shamil’s sister-in-law, Anita Hoosen.  She said her brother-in-law was saved from certain death. “We just don’t know when they will get out of their yard,” said Hoosen. The dog is still in the custody of the owner. The owner, known only as “Baboo”, refused to divulge further details or provide a comment before he put the phone down. Mountain Rise SAPS spokesperson Warrant Officer Joshua Maistry confirmed the incident and said police are investigating a case of “keeping a ferocious dog”. Roland Fivas from the SPCA said they could only act on removing a ferocious dog if ordered to do so by the SAPS. Fivas cautioned against keeping boerbulls, pitbulls and other “power breeds” as pets without proper training and care. “Genetics is important. These dogs are bred purely for protection and their potential to attack and kill. Having them and not taking the proper precautionary measures is like putting a loaded gun on a table and not expecting anyone to pick it up. “In some places, these dogs are chained or put into cages and are even more ferocious when released,” said Fivas. He added that dog-attack cases were becoming more frequent with people demanding help. “We unfortunately can only advise and point the public in the right direction. The SAPS has to open a case under the Animal Amendment Act 42 of 1993. We will assist them if they ask for assistance, but it is ultimately their case,” said Fivas. He advised people to take photos of the injuries; seek medical attention urgently, and open a case with the police. “The investigating officer can then approach a magistrate under the act for an order for removal of the dog. At the end of the day it is an easy process, it is up to you to protect your family from this happening,” said Fivas.