Pietermaritzburg resident Shamalan Pillay is at his wits’ end having been at the receiving end of Home Affairs for nearly three years. In a desperate need to comply with his company’s formalities for his son to be approved for a student bursary, Pillay says he has tried to get an unabridged birth certificate for him. What is more frustrating to Pillay is that he applied for unabridged birth certificates for both his sons — Kevashen and Sameshen — in December 2017, and in January 2018 he received an SMS to collect only Sameshen’s. “We applied for both documents at the same time and when we went to pick up Sameshan’s document we argued this, but the consultant told us she does not know why both were not ready and advised us to wait to receive the notification. “We did wait but could wait no longer and ever since then we have been going to the Department of Home Affairs non-stop, up and down, and on every occasion we were advised that the document was still not ready,” said Pillay. He said that since then he and his wife have even gone as far as completing various resubmission forms for the un­abridged birth certificate and yet are still left wanting for the document. He added that he has received little feedback from the department throughout this time and now Kevashen has begun his tertiary studies at the Durban University of Technology, further adding to his stress. “My son Kevashen has now started at DUT and I applied for a bursary through my work union Sactwu in February and had to explain why I could not include his unabridged birth certificate in the application, which is a requirement,” said Pillay. “Since then they have extended a grace period, however, on June 29 I received an SMS from them requesting the document for the application to be processed correctly.” He added that he then phoned the department because he could not go into the facility physically and was, however, advised that the document was still not ready. Pillay has since declared his problems to Sactwu and was advised by the union that due to the Covid-19 pandemic there have been delays in processing the bursary application. He is now stressed about the financial strain that paying for the full year of studies for his son without the help of the bursary will place on his family. Home Affairs failed to respond to queries by the time of going to print.