Drivers have called on Msunduzi to resurface the pothole-ridden Willowton Road, which they say has become a “death trap”. The road has become so dilapidated that even the pavements have potholes due to grain trucks that often park on the pavement. He said he had lost two tyres on Willowton Road since June so he tried to avoid using it unless he had business in the area. “There are potholes everywhere in Maritzburg but this [Willowton Road] has actually gotten to a point of being ridiculous because every few months the municipality come out and fix them only for that material to come out when it rains or when a heavy truck drives on top of it.” He said Msunduzi had also only attended to the potholes on the road but never fixed those on the pavements which widened over time and ended up causing damage on the actual road. “They must resurface this whole road then enforce the traffic bylaws so that you don’t have trucks parked on the roads or pavements for long hours,” he said. Sibongiseni Mlotshwa, who also works in the vicinity of Willowton Road, feared that someone would be killed because of the potholes there. He said it was especially dangerous at night and on rainy days because drivers swerve all over the road to avoid hitting the potholes. “It’s gotten to a stage where a gravel road would be safer than this one. It’s also uneven because of the mini-speed humps that you get whenever they try and fix the potholes ... “I bet you the municipality would fix this road if people were to start claiming for the damage caused to their tyres.” He said there were a lot of companies that were using Willowton Road to transport goods in and out of the city so he would think that such road should be prioritised as it was critical to the economy of Pietermaritzburg. “This road should always be in a good condition and there should be a truck stop nearby so that truckers wouldn’t have to park on the road or on the pavement because that also damages the infrastructure,” said Mlotshwa, who has worked in the Willowton area for more than 12 years. Truck driver Sanele Zondi said some of the potholes had progressively gotten wider over the months because they were not filled timeously. He said he had several near head-on collisions with oncoming traffic when he swerved to avoid potholes only to have the cars on the opposite lane also trying to do the same on the other side. “We’ve been complaining about the potholes on this road for some time but the problem now is that there are all over Pietermaritzburg so I don’t know if complaining is going to achieve anything because this is a city-wide issue,” said Zondi. Msunduzi spokesperson Ntobeko Ngcobo said the municipality had plans to rehabilitate the road, however due to financial constraints it had not been implemented. In the meantime, she said, the contractor that they currently had on site would attend to the patching of potholes so that the road did not pose more danger to road users and their vehicles. “The traffic department will also be conducting inspections and address the issue of the trucks. “We do wish to apologise to the community for the inconvenience caused and we appeal for patience while we attend to the matter.