What’s going to happen to
all the dead bodies in the country from Monday to Wednesday if funeral parlours
are forced to shut down? This, as people are dying on
a daily basis from Covid-19. That’s the question being
asked by local funeral parlours in the wake of a threatening voice note — made
by an identified man — being forwarded on WhatsApp. He says that if anyone in
the industry operates, there will be repercussions. “We will show you that we
don’t play games”, “make sure your vehicles are parked”, “they will get what’s
coming” and “we are prepared to die for the cause” are some of the things said
on the menacing voice note. It follows a notice issued
on Wednesday by the The Unification Task Team (UTT), to the funeral industry
that there will be a national shutdown of hospitals and mortuaries on Monday
from 8 am. The UTT said it is made up
of funeral associations and forums. Its list of demands is
lengthy and includes them wanting government to allocate a Covid-19 relief fund
for the funeral industry with immediate effect. (See more in the sidebar). However, the Funeral
Industry Reformed Association (FIRA) has distanced itself from the strike
action. It has also encouraged
parlours to lay charges of intimidation and seek protection when removing
bodies from the place of death, if the need arises. Owners of funeral parlours
spoke to Weekend Witness on condition they were unnamed. They are terrified their
premises would be torched or that something bad would happen to them for being
critical of the strike action. One local owner said that
while he does not support the strike action, he will have to close because of
the threats. He recalled that similar threats were made to those in the
trucking industry and trucks were set alight. Another owner said that he
supports the demands and is taking the threats seriously. He said he will be
closing his branches in Durban. In Pietermaritzburg, he said
he will decide closer to the time. The call to shut down has
been described as “insensitive to the families of the bereaved” by another
owner. “They are screaming for us
to shut down. It’s not a legal strike.” He said some of the demands
made are understandable and valid while others are not. The man said legal channels
such as the courts should be used to resolve the issues. “They have threatened
… to burn us in our cars,” he said. He questioned what is going
to happen to the pile up of bodies at private hospitals should the shutdown
happen. He said that while state hospitals have mortuaries, private hospitals
don’t. The government spokesperson,
Phumla Williams, could not be reached for comment.  