NEWS   On Sunday, De Lille responded to allegations of abuse of power made by Mahalingum Govender, the former deputy director-general for real estate management at the department, and the DA, which has been calling for her head. In his complaint, Govender asked Public Protector Busisiwe Mkhwebane to investigate De Lille for abusing her office and powers by interfering in the procurement process in his real estate management services unit. In his 14-page complaint, he said De Lille made irrational and inconsistent decisions aimed at removing “contract” workers. “[She] gets rid of existing workers, then changes the job specifications and advertises to bring in her own Good Party-aligned persons and be nepotistic with the appointments, including that of her sister in 2019 [which was] already exposed in media with no accountability consequence.” Govender claimed De Lille wanted to capture critical posts for her own “hidden agenda”. But De Lille said Govender’s employment contract came to an end in December 2019. “He has now lodged a complaint against me at the Public Protector and I respect the Office of the Public Protector and will co-operate with them as I always have,” she added. Govender also said De Lille gave him unlawful instructions in respect of lease procurement. Suspended director-general Sam Vukela also claimed De Lille had put undue pressure on officials working on the Beitbridge border fence projects. Vukela was suspended after a report by PwC linked him to fraudulent contract management and irregular payments in the planning of state funerals for Winnie Madikizela-Mandela, Zola Skweyiya and ambassador Billy Modise. He also claimed De Lille interfered in the procurement processes especially in the Beitbridge border scandal. De Lille denied the Beitbridge allegations, but admitted in court papers she once identified a service provider [for media services], but gave no instruction for procurement regulations to be flouted. Her role in the Beitbridge border tender had also been questioned when National Treasury hinted she “had a contract, supplier or contractor in mind” for the R40 million project. De Lille said she inherited several unresolved issues. On the DA’s demand for her to resign, she said: “The DA has lost all cases against me in the Western Cape High Court. “They are still bitter and hopping onto anything they can to try and attempt to destroy my reputation now after failing this mission when I was the mayor of Cape Town. “It is not surprising that the DA is jumping on the bandwagon of those in the department who are afraid now that we are coming after them.” — News24  