Msunduzi contravened regulations by allocating the “exorbitant” amount of R27,5 million for bodyguards for the executive committee and councillors in the 2019/20 financial year. This was made up of six bodyguards for Mayor Mzimkhulu Thebolla, two for Deputy Mayor Manilal Inderjit as well as 58 bodyguards split amongst 15 ANC councillors. This was revealed as the City’s leadership was hauled over the coals when it appeared before the parliamentary portfolio committee on co-operative governance and traditional (Cogta) affairs on Thursday evening. Committee chair Faith Muthambi said that in the previous financial year Msunduzi spent a whopping R80 million on just security services. She said that apart from eThekwini, no other municipality in KZN had paid so much for security services. “This is an exorbitant amount and it is harmful to the municipality’s cost containment,” she said. Muthambi said the committee found the R27,5 million expenditure on just bodyguards “very disturbing”. She said it was even more concerning that in some instances the municipality allocated bodyguards to councillors without the police conducting a threat and risk analysis. She said the current legislation decrees that only executive mayors, mayors and speakers are entitled to two bodyguards and the municipality may only deviate from this if that is part of the recommendations on the police assessment report. Only councillors from the ANC have bodyguards, some which were “inherited” by those who previously served on the Exco before last year’s council reshuffle. The issue of private security has been a bone contention between the ANC and opposition parties with opposition members saying this was irregular expenditure. There were also reports that some councillors wanted them for status rather than genuine threats on their lives. “All this comes from a municipality that passed an unfunded adjustment budget for the 2019/20 financial year due to the increased repairs and maintenance burden arising from service delivery protests,” said Muthambi. She added that the National Treasury had assessed the City’s budget for the current 2020/21 fiscal period and also found it to be unfunded. She said Msunduzi’s financial viability was severely compromised as the municipality was sometimes not even able to meet its fixed monthly financial obligation due to cash-flow problems. Muthambi said these were some of the issues that contributed towards Msunduzi becoming the subject of intervention in terms of Section 139(1)(b) of the constitution. “We are concerned [though] about these interventions as cases of successful recovery are rare. The previous 139(1)(b) intervention invoked in Msunduzi in October 2010 clearly did not bear fruit because had it done that, the municipality would have not reverted back to where it is today.” Muthambi said the MEC for Cogta, Sipho Hlomuka, was also finalising two section 106 reports that would be soon tabled at Msunduzi. “This means that the MEC has reason to believe that maladministration, fraud and corruption has occurred in the municipality.” She said the committee was also aware of the reports of intimidation of Auditor-General (AG) senior management and staff during the audit of Msunduzi’s finances. She condemned these acts. Mayor Thebolla told the committee he believed the City had “turned the corner” since the time it was placed under administration as meetings of council structures were now sitting and not deliberately collapsed like before. Of the previous AG’s findings, he said 70% of these had been resolved and the rest were in progress. “On consequence management, there are currently 33 employees undergoing disciplinary processes for various transgressions that include allegations of overtime fraud, stealing and abuse of municipal property.” He said there were also 22 employees who have referred disputes to the SA Local Government Bargaining Council for various reasons, including appealing the outcome of their disciplinary process. “Four employees are facing criminal charges arising from investigations conducted by the Special Investigative Unit (SUI).” There are also 11 cases being probed by the Hawks. Thebolla also told the committee that there were six councillors that were being investigated for allegations of misconduct.