At least 13 000 families around KZN will benefit from food parcels bought through the Solidary Fund which was set up to respond to Covid-19. Dozens of trucks left the Duzi Park warehouse in Camps Drift on Thursday after the Social Development MEC Nonhlanhla Khoza gave the green light that the parcels were packed properly and the food was fit for consumption. “We are pleased to see dignified packages, not something that you can’t even use yourself. This one you can eat it. I can even have this with my own family,” said Khoza. She said the food was bought through the contributions of South Africans to the Solidarity Fund. The fund has given KZN R4,4 million but it is expected that more funding will be allocated to the province as more people come forward to ask for help. Khoza said she is concerned about reports that councillors are politicising the social relief, with some selling the food or giving it to their relatives. “We want to identify all those who live from hand to mouth. We are concerned about the informal traders and even taxi drivers. We know that there are taxis that are not operating at the moment so the drivers must come forward and register to get assistance.” Asked about foreign nationals, Khoza said the Department of Social Development (DSD) will not deport them if they register with their ward councillors to get food parcels, even if they are in the country illegally. She said the issue of immigrants is a huge concern for the department because even those living in the streets do not want to go to the homeless shelters because they fear deportation. “This Covid-19 can affect anyone and for us to get on top of it, we should be able to lock down anyone and if you are locked down you need food, so as Social Development we are prepared to feed anyone that needs help. Our mandate is not to deport anyone; our mandate given by the president of South Africa is to feed people.” DSD’s chief director for research and development, Dr Dumisani Xaba, said they are grateful for the Solidarity Fund’s assistance because the department was not going to be able to effectively respond to the Covid-19 impact through its own budget allocation. “The lockdown has taught us many lessons and one of them is that poverty is deeper than we thought so we need to plan more creatively and innovatively on how to get people out of poverty so that they can be self-reliant,” said Xaba. The Solidarity Fund has appointed the Action Development Agency to manage the process of distributing the food across the province. The agency’s chief executive Tiney Chigunduru said their mandate is to ensure that the food is properly packed and distribute it to the 13 000 beneficiaries’ homes within the next two weeks. Some of the country’s top artists, such as kwaito star Thokozani “Tzozo” Zulu have been working at the warehouse for the past three days packing the food parcels. Zulu said this was their contribution to the country’s efforts to prevent the spread of Covid-19. “We are all affected by Covid-19, even us as artists, so we felt that we should also do our part and lend a hand where we can. “All the artists around KZN are part of different outreach programmes so we don’t only volunteer to work but also go out and give food parcels to needy families,” said Zulu. He urged people to help the needy in their communities during this time, saying most families are struggling to put food on the table because of the economic impact of the virus.