Pietermaritzburg's Fresh Produce Market, in Mkondeni, has been sanitised and is open for business after a worker there recently tested positive for Covid-19. The assurance was given by Mayor Mzimkhulu Thebolla and MEC for Agriculture and Rural Development, Bongi Sithole-Moloi on Tuesday after receiving a progress report from the market management on how the matter was dealt with. They also assessed the precautionary measures that are in place to ensure that the facility is safe for users to prevent the spread of the virus. Sithole-Moloi said it was her department’s responsibility to make sure that Covid-19 did not threaten the province’s food security so she had to ensure that facilities such as markets were operational and safe for the public to use. She said she was satisfied with the way the market’s management handled the recent case as not only the affected staff member received medical attention but tests were also conducted on six colleagues who may have come into contact with her. “They have been found to be negative and they are now back at work… The entire area has also been sanitised.” She was also impressed that the market floors had been demarcated to adhere to the social distancing regulation and hand sanitising stations are available at all entrance and exit points. Market manager Siya Khumalo also gave his assurance that the facility was safe for the public to use. He said since the outbreak of Covid-19, they had not seen much of a change in their weekly output as the start of lockdown coincided with most people getting paid and stocking up on fruit and vegetables for the period. Sithole-Moloi also welcomed the recent national government decision to relax the lockdown regulation to allow spaza shops and informal food traders to resume operations. She said they played a critical role in food value chain from the farms to the consumers. On how her department would ensure that that hawkers adhere to hygiene regulations, she said they will be embarking on a campaign to educate them on their responsibility to “protect themselves and protect their customers”. Mayor Thebolla said Msunduzi has started the process of getting letters of authority to trade during lockdown to hawkers who qualify. He appealed to informal traders to prioritise their safety and that of their customers by regularly sanitising or washing their hands as well as preserving social distance. Thebolla said the municipality understood that not everyone could afford hand sanitisers and in such instances they should have clean water and soap readily available to wash their hands.