The KwaZulu-Natal provincial government is struggling to meet a growing demand for food parcels as Covid-19 begins to really bite. The Social Development Department, which was until recently targeting the most vulnerable groups, such as the disabled and the aged, will now have to provide food to citizens struggling to make ends meet, after losing their income as a result of the lockdown. The department has been accused by political parties, NGOs and community members of turning a blind eye to a large section of the population that has been rendered destitute by the lockdown. DA provincial leader Zwakele Mncwango, who spent the last few days interacting with community members in Zululand, described the situation as “dire”. “The people are struggling and all they want to know is when they will be receiving food parcels. Despite government having pronounced that it has food parcels for the poor, it has proved to be extremely difficult to get the food to those who need it the most. “We all don’t know where the food parcels which the government is claiming to have procured for the poor have gone,” he said. IFP national chairperson Blessed Gwala said councillors in rural municipalities were being bombarded with questions from residents desperate for food. “The residents claim that they heard provincial and national government leaders saying there was food for them, but the fact of the matter is that even the councillors have no clue on how to access the food parcels. Ministers and MECs are not open on how the process of distributing food to the poor works. By not explaining the process to the public the government, leaders have created a situation where those responsible for the distribution of food parcels use government food parcels to enrich themselves,’’ he said. However, the department said it was doing everything in its power to ensure that the needy had access to food. Provincial Social Development spokesperson, Mhlaba Memela, said those who had fallen on hard times but were not on the South African Social Security Agency (Sassa) system should approach their councillors so that they could be registered as indigent people. Social Development MEC Nonhlanhla Khoza will today dispatch food-parcel trucks to all the province’s districts. However, human rights organisation Black Sash said the department’s efforts were unlikely to solve the crisis. “There are currently millions of people who have lost they jobs due to the lockdown. These people are now looking to the government to assist them to buy food and other necessicities. “It’s a crisis of monumental proportion and you don’t solve such a big problem by simply giving people food, they need much more,” Black Sash national director Lynette Maart said. The solution, Maart said, would be for Sassa to register all those who have lost their income due to the lockdown and pay them in the same manner it pays other social grant beneficiaries. “This will remove a lot of administrative and logistical hurdles,’’ she said.