THE announcement of a special six-month Covid-19 grant as part of government’s R500 billion economic and social support package has been met with mixed feelings by Pietermaritzburg residents, with some feeling it will not really benefit them. President Cyril Ramaphosa announced that measures include an increase in child support grants of R300 next month and R500 a month from June to October and all other grant beneficiaries will receive an additional R250 a month. A special coronavirus grant of R350 a month will go to those who are unemployed and do not receive any other form of grant or UIF payment. Ramaphosa said that the South African Social Security Agency (Sassa) will within days implement a technology-based solution to roll out food assistance at scale through vouchers and cash transfers to ensure that help reaches those who need it faster and more efficiently. The Witness took to the streets to get the feeling of the people and got a mixed bag of reactions. Skhumbuzo Mthembu (39) from Sobantu, who is unemployed said the R350 is ‘too little’. “What can you do with R350 for the whole month?” Mthembu asked. “At least he should have said R600, that’s enough for one to be able to buy all the necessities. Food and electricity are expensive,” he said. The father of one, said he has a number of piece jobs (gardening) but nothing permanent. “I’ll apply for the grant if I meet the criteria, but government should at least supplement this money with food parcels. We are not sure how long the lockdown will last,” Mthembu added. Thandeka Mbothwe, a mother of three from Jika Joe informal settlement, said the extra child grant would be beneficial to her as an unemployed mother because every cent she received was important. “Times are tough and every cent counts,” Mbothwe told The Witness. “Under these conditions the monthly grant was not enough.” She said she had to send two of her children to live with her mother in Wartburg to ensure that she had food on the table as she was also unemployed. “I only live with my youngest and R410 was not enough.” In a month, Mbothwe said she only managed to buy an electricity voucher, maize meal and frozen chicken portions. “That only lasts me for two weeks; thereafter I have to ask my neighbours for help. With the Covid-19 virus, I had to accommodate spending on soap and household detergents to comply with the sanitation health message,” she said. Sinothando Bhengu (21), also from Jika Joe, said she was happy with the news. Bhengu, who is expecting her second child, said the child support grant is “not enough”. “Honestly, that’s barely enough for a bag of nappies and a tin of milk ... What about financial coverage for clothes and solid foods? It makes very little difference. It’s a drop in the ocean of what a child costs per month.” Amanda Dlamini from Tamboville was of the view that the special grant fund should have been used to create permanent job opportunities after the national shutdown. Bheki Maphumulo also said R350 is a very small amount. “Waste pickers make that money in a day. How do you expect them to survive? As much as its money that we need, it’s nothing. “Government should have come up with a better solution. People have been hungry for donkey’s years and this money is a temporary solution. This R350 is a disgrace. I can’t deny that I’ll take but all it will be good for is a few beers,” Maphumulo said. Londiwe Ngcamu said she was grateful that the child support grant would get a boost. “R350 is something. More than half of the population is living beyond the poverty line and this money will help put food on the table. If there’s four unemployed persons in a household, they can buy monthly groceries.”