Communities in wards with no councillors have to wait until July before they elect their leaders. This comes after the Electoral Commission (IEC) postponed all the by-elections that were meant to be held in March, April and May. The commission’s provincial spokesperson, Thabani Ngwira, said the regulations state that by-elections must be held within 90 days after the declaration of the vacancy, but that could not happen this time because of the Covid-19 outbreak. In order to ensure that the commission complied with the law, it approached the Electoral Court to request the postponement of the by-elections by 120 days, which was granted. “Accordingly all ward vacancies from March, April and May have been consolidated into a single list for by-elections to be held on the 15th of July. “With regards to June by-elections, the Electoral Commission intends to approach the Electoral Court to seek a 90-day postponement, to this effect a new timetable has not been issued for the June by-elections,” said Ngwira. The four wards that have been affected by the postponement include Msunduzi’s Ward 25, which covers areas such as Townhill and Athlone, and uMvoti’s Ward 7 in Nhlalakahle. In Msunduzi, the more than 8 000 registered voters of the DA-led Ward 25 were meant to go to the polls in March. The councillor’s position became vacant in October, when Melika Singh resigned shortly after making allegations of racism and unfair practices against the DA leadership. She later followed in the steps of four former colleagues who joined the ANC. On Sunday the DA former councillor and candidate for the position, Dave Ryder, said it was disappointing for the by-elections to be postponed a few days before they were meant to be held. “The circumstances called for it because no one could have predicted that we would be faced with a deadly virus during this time of the year.” While he is hopeful that the ward will go to the polls in July, he said he would not be surprised if there was a further postponement as the country continues to battle Covid-19 and its impact on the lives of South Africans. In the meantime the ward is currently under the care of ANC’s Naijma Ahmed, who was appointed as the caretaker councillor after Singh left. “She’s done her best under the circumstances but it hasn’t been easy for her because this is a predominantly a DA ward and the community would prefer having their elected representative dealing with their issues,” said Ryder. The Greytown area was previously led by former mayor Philani “PG” Mavundla, who had to vacate the councillor’s position when he defected from the NFP to form the ABC. The ward was scheduled to hold its by-election this month, where Mavundla intended to contest the position once again.