The first week of the Covid-19 lockdown has started hitting city residents in the pocket, and the self-employed are fast running out of cash. Residents surveyed on Wednesday expressed concerns ranging from boredom to uncertainty. “While I did my best to plan for the 21 days, my main fear is that things will fall apart should the lockdown go beyond the 21 days,” said Somandla Ndlovu, an Eastwood-based Wendy House builder. The father of five, who before the lockdown had been running a thriving business, is among those businesspeople who have been barred from conducting any work for the duration of the lockdown. “I fully support the government’s decision to enforce lockdown regulations but I’m concerned about the future, particularly given that I have a family to support,” he said. Dino Hall, who runs a glass-fitting business, said he was already battling to make ends meet. “It’s a hand-to-mouth kind of a business and with the lockdown it means that I’m not able to eat. I don’t have an idea how I will survive in the next two weeks. “The situation is made worse by the fact that the economy has not been doing well in recent months. This has made it difficult for me to put aside enough money for rainy days like these,” he said.  Car guard Sifiso Gumede: “I have been taken to the Mountain Rise police station three times since the start of the lockdown.”  Sifiso Gumede (26), who in the past seven years has been surviving with the money he made as a car guard at the Raisethorpe Business Centre in Northdale, had been compelled to continue operating despite the lockdown regulations not allowing him to do any car guard work. “Initially, I stayed at home after being told that I can’t continue working but I was forced to take a chance after I ran out of cash. “When the cops come I try to hide but in some cases I don’t see them and end up being locked up. I have been taken to the Mountain Rise police station three times since the start of the lockdown and each time they release me I come straight to Raisethorpe. It’s a choice between being locked up and starving,” he said. While other residents were not in the same predicament as Ndlovu, Hall and Gumede, they too were feeling the brunt of the lockdown. Victor Roux (60), a driver at a local building supplies company, said he was worried that it would take much longer for the government to release funds meant to pay the salaries of workers whose companies shut down because of the lockdown.  Victor Roux (60), a driver from Cinderella Park: “As we speak, I’m not sure whether I will be able to get my next pay cheque.”  “As we speak, I’m not sure whether I will be able to get my next pay cheque. I don’t know how I’m going to survive if I do not get paid,” he said. Vellie Reddy (78), who survives through a government old-age social grant, said while she had been able to access her grant, getting food had become a mission. “Wherever you go the queues are unbearable. I’m old now and it’s not healthy for me to stand in these long queues for the whole day. I don’t have problem with staying at home but the main issue is that government should make it easy, particularly for us old people, to buy food and other essentials whenever we need to,” she said. Unlike in the previous few days where residents formed long queues in shops around the city in a bid to stock up on food, queues in most shops were much shorter on Wednesday. In the CBD, police kept a close watch, with motorists and pedestrians who did not have documents allowing them to enter the CBD being turned back. According to lockdown regulations, residents should buy food at the shops closest to where they live. 