The Nkosinathi Child Aid Project has partnered with the local police emergency services unit to assist struggling families put food on the table during the lockdown. In the past week they distributed 47 food parcels to families in different parts of Pietermaritzburg where breadwinners have had no income as a result of the Covid-19. “We are not just fighting Covid-19, it’s also fight against hunger and we must remember that most people were already struggling before this,” said Ina Smith of Nkosinathi. She said the epidemic has aggravated the problem of poverty that already plagued millions of South African before the lockdown was effected. She said this required everyone who can assist to lend a hand to relief programmes in their area. “Most people were underpaid so whatever they got they used to buy food but now there is no income coming in because they are not going to work. “The problem is not just in the townships but you also have families in the suburbs who are really struggling this time,” she said. She said the lockdown also hit hard in families where temporary jobs are the only source of income and where the adults do not have identity documents to access government social relief programmes. Smith is still hopeful though, saying she was amazed by the number of people who have come forward to support Nkosinathi’s cause. “It may seem like a drop in the ocean but if we can all do our bit wherever we are I really believe we can make a difference.” One of the recipients of the food parcels, Jason Randelhoff from Lincoln Meade, said times have been tough. “I’m really grateful for the help because I haven’t received any income since the lockdown started,” said the father of two. Police spokesperson Sergeant Mthokozisi Ngobese said the Pietermaritzburg cluster is appreciative of the initiative by the provincial emergency services unit to assist those in need. He said the unit consisted of teams responsible for search and rescue, accidents as well as the flying squad.