Legal practitioners are already feeling the brunt of the lockdown and it’s expected to worsen if legal services are not declared as essential services. The Legal Practice Council has sent a nine-page document, addressed to all stakeholders in the legal profession, highlighting the impact of the lockdown on legal practices and suggesting solutions. This follows a request by the minister of Justice and Constitutional Development to provide an assessment of the current business and economic impact of the measures implemented during lockdown. The document said the impact of the lockdown can be separated into various categories — financial, operational, technological and human resources. About 80% of the expenses of law firms remain unchanged. They are for salaries, office rental, legal practitioner levies and other operational costs. Most firms have already experienced a downturn in revenue and expect it to continue. Clients are unable to pay their legal bills because they are not operating. If a law firm is unable to function and generate income, its downstream suppliers such as advocates, correspondent attorneys, courier companies and the sheriffs across the country, are all not being paid. The council said the cost of equipping staff to work remotely is expensive and that those who specialise in criminal law are unable to operate at all since most of their work is trial work and court appearances. Advocates are also not being paid. For many practitioners, working remotely is not possible for various reasons such as the lack of IT infrastructure. Concerns have also been raised that the court restrictions will have an adverse knock-on effect once the lockdown has been lifted. The bottleneck at the registrar’s, masters and deeds offices will then become apparent and will add to inefficiencies. “Legal practitioners in SA will feel the brunt more harshly than their contemporaries in the United Kingdom or the USA. “The reason for this is the pre-existing challenges which the legal practitioners were facing — the lack of transformation, skewed briefing patterns, a weak economy, a weak rand, the financial effects of state capture, corruption and poor governance. “The consequence is that unless financial aid is provided to legal practitioners, particularly sole practitioners and junior advocates, most legal practitioners in those categories will close their practices during or within a few months after the lockdown has been lifted”. Possible solutions to be submitted to the minister include that all government departments and state-owned entities that owe on invoices for legal practitioners as at March 31, make immediate payment. The council wants legal services to be declared essential services for all matters. Practitioners should be allowed to access their offices for work, subject to the need for social distancing as well as the need to implement health measures. Courts, such as high courts and magistrate’s courts, should be opened to deal with normal opposed and trial matters. “Trials and opposed matters may be heard remotely by video conference, as far as is practicable, and steps should be taken to implement video conferencing across all superior, regional and district courts.” Social justice law clinics and legal aid clinics should also be allowed to operate. Rental subsidies should be offered to deserving junior advocates and sole to medium sized attorneys’ firms who are unable to practice and who will not be able to make payment of chamber fees/rent and its concomitant payments. This can be a percentage payment of rental/chamber fees, for example 50% or any such other amount. The Attorneys Development Fund should be used to assist legal practitioners who fall within the most vulnerable to assist them during this period. The council will establish and contribute to a benevolent scheme to ameliorate the financial hardship which will be faced by affected legal practitioners.