The Royal Agricultural Showgrounds halls are to be used as a Covid-19 quarantine facility. This was confirmed by the KwaZulu-Natal Department of Health spokesperson Ntokozo Maphisa. He said the Royal Showgrounds is one of a number of facilities in KZN identified to screen, test and isolate patients. It is not yet known how many patients can be accommodated. Work has already begun to convert the Olympia hall, Halls 7 and 8, into medical-like facilities that will house people who need to be quarantined and isolated. Quarantined people are those who have tested for the virus and are awaiting results while isolation facilities are for those who have already tested positive for the virus. The project was handed over to the project developers late last week and is expected to be completed by the end of this week. Provincial government spokesperson Lennox Mabaso yesterday confirmed details of those facilities were still being finalising and would be revealed this week. The Moses Mabhida stadium in Durban is also being touted as a quarantine facility that will use temporary tents to accommodate the patients. Meanwhile, Melanie Veness, the chief executive officer of the Pietermaritzburg and Midlands Chamber of Business (PMCB), which has its offices at the Showgrounds, has registered their disappointment at not being included in discussions. Veness said the decision has made it impossible for them to work out of Chamber House and that they would be seeking to recover relocation rental and associated costs for the temporary relocation from the Society. “While we are cognisant of the need to establish quarantine centres, we must register our disappointment that this matter was not discussed with us prior to the agreements being signed between the Royal Agricultural Society and the Department of Health. “It materially affects our ability to operate from our premises. “In fact, this decision has essentially rendered it impossible for us to work from Chamber House for the foresee­able future,” said Veness.