Thousands of Pietermaritzburg workers who are sitting at home during the lockdown face a bleak future as government plans to provide them with financial support have hit a snag. The majority of the workers, who have been taken off their employers’ payrolls after government ordered the shutdown of non-essential businesses, will not get paid at the end of the month as the Department of Labour has not been able to process their Unemployment Insurance Fund (UIF) applications. Melanie Veness, the chief executive of the Pietermaritzburg and Midlands Chamber of Business (PMCB), said several employers had not been able to submit UIF applications as the process had become cumbersome. “Initially, they were told to submit the applications manually but the department later told them to do it electronically. “However, most of them were not able to lodge their applications electronically as the system kept on rejecting their applications.” The department only accepted applications from employers who have a UIF registration number. “While most of the employers have been making UIF contributions, they have been making the payments directly to the South African Revenue Services (SARS) and as such were never given a UIF registration number,” Veness said. “There is a lot of confusion and red tape and the tragedy of all this is that it is the workers’ livelihoods which are at stake with the majority of workers are now in real danger of not receiving any income at the end of the month,” Veness added. A Pietermaritzburg employer who spoke on condition of anonymity told The Witness that he has spent the last few weeks trying to submit an application. “There has been no luck as the department kept on changing the rules. “I now keep my cell phone off most of the time as I don’t know what to say to my workers who have been affected by the lockdown. They want to know whether they will be receiving any payment at the end of the month but I can’t get them an answer,” he said. However, even the workers of the few employers who have been able to submit UIF applications were in a similar predicament as the department is struggling to finalise the applications due to a lack of staff. This is after 27 000 employers made applications for their workers to access the UIF benefits under the government’s Covid-19 Temporary Employee/Employer Relief Scheme (TERS). Employment and Labour Minister Thulas Nxesi, who earlier maintained that the department had the capacity to handle the applications, has finally conceded that it was struggling to process the large volumes that had been coming through since the announcement of the lockdown last month. “The system was never meant to face such a huge demand because it is very small, helping with 10 000 to 20 000 claims. Now we are talking millions. In terms of the system, we are not going to be able to deliver as we are supposed to,” he said. The department was in the process of roping in SARS and commercial banks in an attempt to shorten the application period. Labour federation Cosatu said its members, who have been trying to seek clarity from the department, were currently in panic mode. “The sad part is that even the department’s toll free number is not working properly, the system keeps on crashing,” Cosatu provincial secretary, Edwin Mkhize, said. By late yesterday afternoon, Cosatu, other unions, government leaders and business representatives were still locked in an emergency meeting in an attempt to resolve the matter. Workers of employers whose applications have been approved will receive a maximum of R6 730 per month depending on their salaries. Employers who are unable to pay the full salaries of workers during the current Covid-19 lockdown should contact the department at: 0800 030 007.