MSUNDUZI Municipality’s electricity contractors allege they have not been paid for over six months and are owed millions of rands. They perform services for the municipality that include cutting off the electricity supply to those in arrears, reconnecting electricity and fixing electricity faults. Most of these contractors employ sub-contractors, who have also not been paid for months. Sources said there were more than 10 contractors and 40 sub-contractors. However, it’s difficult to quantify this number now as the some of their businesses have folded. A sub-contractor told The Witness he is battling to survive after being without an income for the past six months. He explained that once he has done a job, he submits an invoice to the contractor who in turn submits it to the municipality. He mainly does disconnections and reconnections and bills over R15 000 a month, depending on the number of jobs. Another sub-contractor said some of them have not received payment since August yet they have been working monthly. “We are currently not working due to the lockdown and some of us are from other provinces and don’t have food. “The municipality never bothered to tell us when we will get paid. Msunduzi is killing contractors since 2018, if not mistaken. How come they still owe us invoices from the last financial year?” She added that they have little input about the money they are owed because the municipality only deals with the main contractors. One of the contractors confirmed that all of them were having payment problems. “We get told to wait. We invoice them. At Havelock Road [where the municipality’s electricity depot is located], it is approved and then sent to finances, where the problem lies … we are owed about R4 million.” He also attends to electricity faults. He said “we get paid bits and pieces, not the bulk of the money due”. “I don’t know how the sub-contractors are managing. I don’t know if they have to borrow money to survive.” The manager of another contracting business said his company was contracted in terms of the supplies and services contract no. e37 of 2016, which is for the “appointment of service providers for the installation, maintenance and repairs of medium and low voltage electrical infrastructure: substations, overhead, underground mains and customer services”. The man said the contract came into effect in March 2017, but they have not received full payment once and are owed about R2 million. He said they stopped using sub-contractors because of the payment issues and his company stopped working for the municipality in December because his boss was not seeing a return on investment. Msunduzi spokesperson Thobeka Mafumbatha said the matter was being investigated. “