There is no army deployment to Pietermaritzburg as the city is not considered as a “volatile, high crime and unrest risk” area. For residents who have been wondering where the SANDF was in the city as throngs of people flocked to supermarkets and milled around the streets, sources have confirmed that the army has been mainly deployed to Kwa-Mashu, Umlazi and other high density areas on the instruction of the South African Police Services. Senior local police officers confirmed to The Witness that Pietermaritzburg, according to their crime statistics and general everyday feed-back to the provincial Joint Operations Centre (JOC), was not considered a high-risk area and could easily be managed by the police force available and therefore there was no need for the army to be deployed. “We do not have a situation that cannot be managed in the city. We are aware that there are certain areas that continue business and life as usual but we will be looking at that. “Our mandate is to continue with roadblocks to monitor people’s movement and to ensure businesses are complying with regulations. The bottom line is that police cannot be everywhere all the time. We are doing the best that we can,” said the officer. Other local police officers have also issued an appeal to residents to pay heed to the lockdown and to “stay at home”. “We are continuously hearing people asking where the police and where the army are ... that we are useless and doing nothing. But I want to ask why the members of the public are not adhering to the rules? Why are civilians not obeying instructions? Why are people still walking in the streets for no apparent reason? Why are people still visiting shebeens? Why are they still having parties and visiting friends during lock-down? “This fight against the virus does not belong to the SAPS and SANDF. It is not our war. It is your war, my war, everybody’s war. Why must the police enforce a law that was issued for your own protection and your own good? Everyone expects the SAPS and SANDF to play their part and do their jobs — but what about you — are you playing your part and being responsible?” asked the one senior officer in the city. Navy Captain Jaco Theunissen, operational communication officer at the national Joint Operations Division, said their mandate was to render assistance to the SAPS and be deployed according to their instructions. “We do not normally discuss deployments and operations. Basically, all I can say is that the police tell us where they want us and we support their plans. We are the last line of defence. So if we are not in a particular area, the SAPS has deemed our presence unnecessary at that point there,” said Theunissen. Another military source said the army had definitely been deployed in all the provinces but “that it was simply impossible to be at all the places”. “The amount of people out there is what we have. We cannot be everywhere. “There is not enough personnel on the ground,” said the source. 