With the KZN Social Development Department forking out R22 million for blankets as part of Covid-19 emergency measures, there is growing concern that the project is being used for self-enrichment by using emergency procurement procedures, and the DA is calling for an investigation into the matter. It has emerged that the department is sourcing blankets, which cost between R120 and R150 each, from service providers at close to R600 each, with some companies having invoiced the department for more than R6 million. “Who are they buying the blankets for because even middle class people can’t afford to buy a R600 blanket under the current economic circumstances,” DA social development provincial spokesperson Elama Rabe said. Sources within the department, concerned about the large volumes being purchased, have also claimed that some of the directors of the companies procuring the items for the department have links with senior officials at the department. “They are choosing companies where they know they will receive kickbacks,” an official at the department said. The department claims the 48 000 blankets bought for R22 million are for homeless people currently being placed in shelters. However, the senior officials said figures at the shelters were much lower and did not justify the massive order placed by the department. “Yes, there are currently homeless people living in shelters due to the coronavirus but if you look at a shelter like the one in Mayor’s Walk in Pietermaritzburg, there are less than 300 people there. “How people then use the issue of the coronavirus shelters to justify the procurement of 48 000 blankets boggles the mind. “It seems certain individuals within the department have turned Covid-19 into a get-rich-quick scheme,” the official said. While the department was not compelled to put the work out to tender given that Covid-19 has been declared a disaster, the IFP said it was concerned the emergency procurement procedures would open floodgates for corruption. “It does open opportunities for corruption, we are deeply concerned about the way prices are currently being inflated,” IFP provincial social development spokesperson, Les Govender said. According to documents in possession of  The Witness, the department was currently processing the R22 million invoices. Despite sanitisers, soap as well as other health equipment being central in the fight against the pandemic, the department only spent R8 million on these items. Most of the service providers used for the procurement of the blankets appear to have been handpicked by officials, with a communication company also having scored a lucrative tender. The department operates on a cluster system, with its four clusters in the province being Pietermaritzburg, eThekwini, Ulundi and the Midlands. An e-mail sent out by its chief financial officer, Brian Ndaba, to line managers on March 24, indicates that the department had ordered an extraordinarily high quantity of blankets. In the e-mail, Ndaba instructs line managers, who were initially told to procure 1 000 blankets per cluster, to increase the number to 12 000 per cluster. The department currently faces complaints from NPOs and service providers that it had been taking months to process invoices and pay for services rendered. However, in the case of the blanket service providers, the department appears to have taken a short space of time to process their invoices. Late last year the department initiated disciplinary processes against several senior officials after forensic investigations had found that officials had been colluding with service providers to defraud the department. The department on Sunday justified its decision to procure the 48 000 blankets. “The department did not go out on tender in view of Covid-19 being declared a disaster and the procurement was an emergency. Procurement was done in line with National Treasury Instruction Note 3 of 2016/207, section 8,” the department spokesperson, Mhlaba Memela, said. There was a need for the blankets given the threats posed by Covid-19, said Memela. He added he was not aware of any officials linked to the service providers, and denied that the department was using the project to enrich certain individuals.