As humanitarian organisations and government work around the
clock to finalise plans to provide food relief amid the Covid-19 lockdown,
there is a significant upsurge in hunger and food insecurity. Painting a bleak picture, the Pietermaritzburg Economic
Justice and Dignity Group — a non-governmental organisation that conducts
research in poor communities — said that the number of food stressed people is
on the rise. “Many informal workers are now at home and they have no
access to cash to purchase food. “Secondly, many of the informal traders are not operating,
people who do have a little bit of money have to go into the big shops,” said
the group’s Mervyn Abrahams. Abrahams said because of long queues and social distancing
regulations, women cannot canvass different shops for specials. “Often that means that people have to buy what is not
affordable or drop things out of their basket. Another factor at play is that
as people are buying more soaps and bleach in order to disinfect their homes
and to ensure that they wash their hands, they don’t have additional budgets
for food. The ability to buy vegetables and fruits falls out of the basket.” He said that the roll out of food parcels response has been
a “logistical nightmare”. “Councillors are stealing what should be going to poor
households. Part of the logistical nightmare has been the bureaucratic
procedure of trying to determine who qualifies and who doesn’t qualify. “We have to accept that people living in townships, no
matter what their level of income, are hungry and need the food,” he said. Abrahams said government needed to look at ways to create a
localised food production network inside the cities to augment food security. On Tuesday, President Cyril Ramaphosa announced that the
government would implement economic measures to aid citizens during the
national lockdown. These included an additional R300 to child support grant
beneficiaries in May and a R500 increase from June to October. All other grant
beneficiaries would receive an additional R250 a month for the next six months. Unemployed citizens who did not receive a grant or UIF
payout would benefit from the Covid-19 distress grant of R350 a month for the
next six months. Yusuf Essa of the Muslim Alliance Relief PMB said hunger and
food insecurity are dire. The movement will be distributing about 20 000
hampers over the next four weeks in Pietermaritzburg and surrounding areas. “A big concern from the lockdown is the number of mothers
coming to the shelter because they have children starving. We have helped about
3 000 people ... but there is not enough food.”