A group of Muslim theologians, representing more than 20 South African mosques and their worshippers, will be approaching the courts to challenge the national lockdown regulations prohibiting large groups from attending daily prayers. The Mujlisul Ulama of South Africa and Jamiatul Ulama of South Africa, through their attorney, have issued a letter to the Presidency, asking that the regulations be relaxed, as they have been for the taxi industry. There are however opposing views in the Muslim community, with some saying home prayer should continue. Secretary-general for the Jamiatul Ulama of South Africa, Ebrahim Bham, clarified that there were two different theological organisations under the same name, which was currently the subject of a legal battle. Last week Transport Minister Fikile Mbalula announced that taxis could run at 70% capacity, provided each passenger wore a mask and gloves. Pleading their case the theologians pledge to reduce the numbers of worshippers at each prayer session. The group undertakes to ensure whorshippers each wear masks and gloves, are screened for a high temperature and to check their travel history before entering the mosque. The group said Islamic practices always demand a high standard of hygiene. “In preparing for the daily prayers, Muslims are required at minimum to perform ritual ablutions with water in which hands, face, arms and feet are thoroughly washed.” Attorney Zehir Omar, representing the applicants, said they were preparing court papers and hoped the Pretoria High Court would hear the matter this week. The applicants are the Society of the Protection of our Constitution and the Jamiatul Ulama of South Africa. Omar said he wrote to the Minister of Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs, Dr Nkosozana Dlamini Zuma, and President Cyril Ramaphosa. In that letter he states that their efforts are supported by at least 10 other South African Muslim organisations, that include several thousand worshippers at mosques located in Port Elizabeth, King William’s Town, Tembeni Township, Cape Town, Durban, Johannesburg, De Deur, Meyerton and elsewhere. The letter says the lockdown regulations had created “spiritual depression” in Muslims. “Relative to the taxi industry, grocery stores and spaza shops, the danger of the spread of the virus via mosques is practically nil.” Omar said the regulations infringe on rights to freedom of movement and for everyone to practise their religion. “Our clients’ appeal is for the government to understand that just as physical food is essential for the survival of people, so too is spiritual food (worship) essential for our spiritual survival,” read the letter. Omar maintains further that government acted unconstitutionally in not declaring a state of emergency that would have allowed it to restrict freedom of movement, and believes the motive was to prevent the UN sending a human rights committee to oversee government actions. The Jamiatul Ulama of South Africa’s Bham said that the theological group he represents is not party to the letter to the president. He said even though they would like congregations to resume as normal before Ramadaan, the Jamiatul Ulama South Africa (formerly Jamiatul Ulama Transvaal), reiterated the call for suspension of congregations during the national lockdown period, saying the virus can only be contained by social distancing.