COVID-19 lockdown travel regulations favour the dead rather than the living. This is what emerged on Monday as Howick attorney Amy Findlater was forced to approach the high court for an urgent order on behalf of a KZN client whose pleas all failed for government and law enforcement to help him get his disabled, ill and at times violent son into the only facility that caters for his special condition and needs — The Open Circle at Alexandra Hospital in Cape Town. According to the court papers it had emerged that one regulation — Regulation 11B (1)(a) (i) — confines people to their residences unless “strictly” for the purpose of seeking emergency, life-saving or chronic medical attention. Another regulation, 11(B)(1)(a), stipulates that movement between provinces is prohibited other than in limited instances which relate to travel by essential workers, transport of essential goods, cargo from ports, transport of mortal remains and people attending funerals. The man said he was advised the regulations did not allow for him to travel from KZN to the Cape to take his son to the hospital concerned, as it was not specifically included in the exemptions. Findlater told The Witness it seemed ironic that the regulations made provision for attending funerals in another province, but not for a living person requiring health care to travel to another province. The 76-year-old man, who will not be named to protect his son, said on affidavit he could not cope any longer during the lockdown with his son, who is disabled and suffers from “regular, unexplained and sudden outbursts of rage”. “These outbursts are explosive, frightening and dangerous to [the son] and to those around him when they occur,” the father said in court papers. High court
application brought via Zoom The ill man was accepted into The Open Circle, the only
facility that caters for his needs, but then the father ran into lockdown
regulations prohibiting inter-provincial travel. Even his lawyer’s
representations to the minister of Cogta responsible for drawing up the travel
regulations, came to nought. On Monday Pietermaritzburg advocate Christo van Schalkwyk,
SC, assisted by advocate Sonja Franke, brought an urgent virtual application
via Zoom before Judge Piet Bezuidenhout in the Pietermaritzburg high court. Judge Bezuidenhout ultimately granted a court order
consented to by the parties which allows the father to travel between provinces
and districts only to take the ill man from the Midlands to The Open Circle
facility. Father and son are also permitted to sleep over for one
night at a specified address in Port Elizabeth to break the long journey. The
court order stipulates that they shall only travel once the father is in
possession of negative Covid-19 test results for both himself and his son. He also has to comply with relevant health guidelines to
minimise the risk of exposing either of them or anyone else to the Covid-19
virus. Findlater told The Witness she and the two advocates had
consulted via Whatsapp and cellphone and drafted the papers in that way. “I had
to get a special permit just to travel to the high court for the case,” she
said. In his affidavit her client says his son is autistic and had
also suffered from oedema (restricted supply of blood and oxygen to the brain
damaging brain cells) in 1989 and suffered intractable epilepsy from the same
year. He also had complications from a tick bite fever illness and
his condition was further complicated by many anti-epileptic drugs that had
adversely impacted his behaviour. He thereafter had an accident in which both
his legs were shattered. His condition is not treatable or manageable by a carer at
home or normal facility for the intellectually disabled. “The only facility that
is willing at this stage to admit or accommodate [him] is The Open Circle. The
father says while currently trying to care for his son at home, the lockdown
has “taken its toll” on both of them as he is unable to adequately attend to
his needs, as he too has health issues. Attempts to obtain a permit initially from local police
failed as they don’t have the authority to issue a permit, a magistrate had
also advised that she could not grant an order as the regulations did not allow
for it, and written representations to the minister of Cogta (who made the
regula The police ministry was also not authorised to issue permits
for inter-provincial movement.