KwaZulu-Natal music and television stars have been working at the Duzi Park warehouse, in Camps Drift, since last week packing food parcels to be distributed across the province. Most of them have been reporting for duty at the warehouse every morning while others came when they could in between their other commitments. The food was bought through the contributions of South Africans who donated to the Solidarity Fund. The fund has given the province R4,4 million but it is anticipated that more funding will be allocated to the province as more people come forward to ask for help due to the change of their financial situation as a result of Covid-19. The Solidarity Fund has appointed the Action Development Agency to manage the process of distributing food across the KZN, and the province’s entertainers are assisting the agency’s teams with packing it into parcels. Leading the artists’ pack is kwaito star Thokozani “Tzozo” Zulu, chair of the KZN Creative Industry Forum. He said they decided to help after finding out that the Action Development Agency did not have funds to hire staff to pack the food parcels and load it into trucks. Zulu said almost everyone in the entertainment industry wanted to get involved. “We’ve had such a positive response from across the industry, which is great to see because at least now people can take turns to come and assist. “We only take 10 people a day so that we can still adhere to social distancing,” said Zulu. Award-winning DJ Cindo (real name Sindisiwe Zungu), who joined the group for the first time yesterday, said it was amazing to see industry players coming together to lend a hand during this crisis. “It’s hard work but it feels really good to give back and play my part,” she said. “I will definitely be back to help because I believe this is the time where all of us should be working together to alleviate the scourge of Covid-19.” Popular actor Simphiwe Majozi, from the soapie Uzalo, said he found out about the initiative a few days ago and decided that it was a worthwhile cause. He said he has not been working since the lockdown started so it was nice to keep busy and do some good for other people. “We stopped shooting the day the lockdown started because our set attracts a lot of people who come and watch us since we shoot on location,” Majozi said.