Professor Salim Abdool Karim (pictured), the government’s
chief adviser on Covid-19, has unequivocally warned that there will be an
increase in number of infections after the lock-down is lifted. But a strategy, involving cellphone technology, data and an ops
room set up for the 2010 World Cup is in place to help flatten the curve. Karim, who was speaking at a webinar hosted by the
University of KwaZulu Natal’s Data@breakfast monthly session, said while there
was not much prospect of infections not taking off, they were “not going to sit
by and let it do so”. “Nobody ever thought we would need to deal with something
like this,” he said, adding that, at the very least, the Soccer World Cup in
2010 gave us an edge. “At the Council for Scientific and Industrial Research
(CSIR), we had put in place an amazing ops centre for the World Cup. It is a
wall full of big television screens showing maps of the country, where police
stations are and so on. What we now had to do was add data into the system of
where the cases are.” That’s where the community health workers come in, using
cellphone technology, he said. “Those who 
have taken this condition seriously and understand its reproductive rate
of between two and three will know the virus has an edge over anything we could
do in a population that has absolutely zero antibodies”. The recent spike is from infections from the beginning of
lockdown. Positive laboratory results, he said, pertained to
infections that occurred, on average, two weeks prior. What we are seeing now
in terms of the spike is a result of improved data from the roll out of the
community health-care worker programme. “The first two weeks of cases that we see after lockdown
actually occurred before the lockdown. The third week of lockdown is probably our
best indicator of infections that occurred straight after the lockdown,” he
explained. He said the initial phase of closing schools, preventing
gatherings from March 16 until the lockdown “had a marked impact that took our
daily number of cases to quite a low level”. “Now this week what we are seeing is the results from the
first week of the lockdown but it is not a clear indicator as this phase also
coincided with the rolling out of mass community health worker screening
programmes. “In the past seven days we have had more than a million
screenings taking place, of which 10 000 cases were referred for testing. Our
goal is to do a million screenings in one week.” Learning from countries ahead of us, Karim said others had
underestimated “the enemy”. “Some people thought they could outwit this virus,
that you didn’t need to really tackle it head on, and that you could either try
to achieve herd immunity by allowing natural infection [particularly in young
people in whom it is quite mild], or you take partial protection measures
allowing a spread to occur while protecting the elderly.” He said these strategies were not effective elsewhere. Karim also said the virus’ impact on HIV-positive people is
unknown, and he expressed concern about the impact on those with low CD4 counts
who are not on anti-retroviral treatment. There are about 2,5 million South Africans who are not on
anti-retroviral treatment — of which about 500 000 had low CD4 counts. “I hope
I’m wrong but we can expect the fatality rate in this group to be similar to
what we’ve seen here and abroad with the elderly.”