The army was in town on Friday in a show of force against those who are still not taking the regulations seriously. But, they’re not staying. Their presence in the capital was short lived as they headed back to Durban on Friday night. The 65 SA National Defence Force (SANDF) members who formed part of police roadblocks in Dr Chota Motala and Edendale roads were from Durban and returned there on Friday night. A source within the SANDF said the soldiers were part of a law enforcement team that gets deployed to places that have been identified as hotspot areas. “So far no area within Pietermaritzburg has been identified as a hotspot. Yes people break the law by driving or walking without the necessary permits but when police tell them to go back home they comply. It’s only in those areas where there is either resistance or potential for resistance where army assistance gets sought. If there are big problems somewhere within KZN tomorrow then the soldiers you are seeing here today will be deployed there,” he said. There are currently close to 200 soldiers who use Pietermaritzburg as their base, but they are all currently on duty on the borders between KZN and neighbouring countries such as Mozambique and Swaziland. KZN police have previously revealed that they do not have manpower to enforce the rules. “Police can’t be expected to be on each and every street corner, we simply don’t have the numbers to do that,” KZN community safety spokesperson Kwanele Ncalane said on Friday. Even with the arrival of the army in Pietermaritzburg, Ncalane said police operations would remain restricted to hotspot areas. “Yes, there would be roadblocks and police patrols and people are being arrested as we speak. But having said that, you can’t expect police to arrest each and every one who is currently breaking the regulations, particularly given the level of non-compliance in the province. “What people should understand is that the regulations were meant to protect them and that it is in their interest for them to comply,” he said. This as Pietermaritzburg police were battling to deal with the level of compliance within the city.While the level of noncompliance in various parts of Pietermaritzburg, including the CBD, Sweetwaters and Northdale has been extremely high in the past few days, the source said the violations were viewed in the context of the social grants pay circle which began on Monday.“Now that people have been paid things are expected to return back to normal,” he said.Out of the 1 400 people who have been arrested in KZN for violating lockdown regulations, 10 have since been convicted. 