For some Jika Joe informal settlement residents, the launch of the Covid-19 community screening and testing programme there has been a curse and a blessing. Although they now know where they stand after being given a clean bill of health by the provincial Health Department, a group of residents who work for Willowton Group said they faced discrimination and stigma at work. However, Willowton has denied this, saying they believe their actions were just, fair and reasonable and were executed with as little prejudice to any employees as possible. The residents received the results of their tests on Monday. The 15 residents, who said they were all employed by the Willowton Group, said they had all been placed on special leave amid a rumour that there was a potential positive Covid-19 case in the Jika Joe Informal settlement. They told The Witness that as a precautionary measure, the company asked all employees from Jika Joe to get tested and only return to work with their results in hand. The workers were all placed on leave on April 9. The residents said they were concerned as they had nothing to prove that they did not have the virus. “Government hasn’t said there’s a confirmed case here. We don’t know why we were told to stop going to work,” said one resident who asked to remain unnamed for fear of reprisals. “We felt humiliated in front of our colleagues. Who will want to work with us now that we’ve been singled out?” The residents said they feared not being allowed back to work as they had no proof that they had tested negative for the virus. “We were supposed to get SMSes or letters, but we have none of that. We can’t go back to work without any proof,” said another resident. Abdul Samad Amod, uMgungundlovu District Covid-19 tracer team coordinator, who was handing the results, said the provincial Health Department would liaise with the Willowton Group. Willowton Group said out of concern for their 900 employees on the Pietermaritzburg site and in terms of their Covid-19 policies, a decision was made to ask all employees who live at or frequented Jika Joe to be placed in self-isolation pending the outcome of the Covid-19 tests that were to take place at Jika Joe on April 16 as part of the national testing roll-out. The company said 15 employees were placed in self-isolation at home and were advised that they would be on full paid leave pending the outcome of their Covid-19 tests this week. “This is in the normal course and excludes any payment for overtime. As a responsible essential services provider, we have taken every precaution to ensure the safety and health of all of our employees, suppliers and any third parties who have to attend at our Pietermaritzburg site for the purposes of rendering essential services. This includes having every person who enters the site temperature tested. In the event that any person is found to have a heightened temperature, they are not permitted on the premises. “There has been little financial prejudice to any of these employees and we acted to mitigate all risks given the present proliferation of the spread of Covid-19 and for the safety and protection of our other approximately 900 employees. “We received confirmation [on Monday], that these employees have now been tested and were found to be negative. We have asked them to return to work.” Willowton said the actions taken were fully in line with their internal Covid-19 policies, a copy of which has been given to all employees. They said the employees were fully briefed on the action taken and why it was taken and “expressed satisfaction at what was explained to them”. “This seems to be a complaint pertaining to loss of overtime pay which in the circumstances surely is unreasonable.” The company said following confirmation of the results, all the workers have been asked to return to work. 'HEALTH VEHICLES DO NOT MEAN AN AREA IS INFECTED' Abdul Samad Amod, uMgungundlovu District Covid-19 tracer team co-ordinator, warned that fake news about the virus had a negative impact and caused people to be stigmatised. “When people see the Department of Health vehicles, they take pictures and stigmatise the members in that community. “In a disaster we all need to support each other and remove the stigma,” Amod said. — WR.