Armed with aprons, sharp knives and chopping boards, an army
of residents has banded together to address hunger, one meal at a time, amid
the Covid-19 lockdown. Providing food relief and other humanitarian aid, the foot
soldiers offer support, especially to those that are financially and socially
disadvantaged. One of the feeding schemes, Action in Isolation, which was
started two weeks ago, operates in the Midlands and feeds over 1 000 children a
day. In keeping with “the spirit of ubuntu”, Robyn Gruijters has
partnered with community care workers and school principals to run seven
feeding centres in Lidgetton Village, Crystal Springs Primary School, Zenzele
Village in Balgowan, Ntuli Block Rosetta, Lions River, Sthendeni Settlement in Nottingham
Road and Bruntville in Mooi River. “The idea came about after the first address by President
Ramaphosa on Covid-19,” Gruijters told Weekend Witness. “I was aware of the impact that the closure of schools would
have on the children who are fed daily through the nutritional programmes. I
thought I could get a couple of friends to make soup and sandwiches to deliver
to certain points to alleviate short-term hunger.” What Gruijters had envisioned to be a small project “took a
life of its own”, and has grown into a community supported initiative. “We had
originally identified two areas but because of the generosity that people
showed, we had capacity to grow the project. “We have had farmers in the area that have donated produce.
In a time where they are also stressed, they have been amazing. The fresh
produce helps to stretch the financial donations further.” Action in Isolation has partnered with school principals and
community care workers in the communities it supports. The children get one and sometimes two meals a day. “Some of
the children’s parents work at the nearby farms and for us it was paramount
that they still had a meal Monday to Friday.” Gruijters encouraged residents to partner with existing
organisations to create a collaborative effort during the lockdown. “The need
is dire. So many people feel forgotten and the reactions have been
overwhelming. “You can see how the children’s faces change once they’ve
eaten. They suddenly have a little spark back in them.” What can you do if you want to help? Gruijters suggests that you get in touch with local
humanitarian organisations to get involved. “Financial contributions help. Certain organisations have
collection points at various supermarkets as well. There is also an avenue for
people to cook, by following regulations on how the food can be stored in a
smaller portions,” she said. To ensure the safety of the caregivers and the
beneficiaries, Action in Isolation has provided reusable face shields and
hygiene packs. Also lending a helping hand is uMngeni Municipality ward
councillor Craig Millar, who is assisting with deliveries of food for people
who are housebound as well as for the children of Never Never Land Creche in
Emandleni area, Cedara. “We are also filling empty water bottles with Dettol and
water mixes for informal dwellers. They can’t wash their hands if they don’t
have water. “People are grateful. We shouldn’t just be doing this
because there’s an outbreak. These are the responsibilities that responsible
public representatives engage in on a permanent basis.” Those helping were contributing sandwich fillings and other
food items, as well as ice cream containers to pack food. Call for virtual volunteering Online social platform forgood.co.za is encouraging South
Africans to spend their lockdown making a difference through virtual
volunteering. From designing a home workout routine for children, to
helping a substance abuse prevention programme with financial management,
virtual volunteering is a way for South Africans to create impact, without
leaving their homes. “We’re living through a particularly trying time in
history, but it’s also a time where we are likely to see the best side of
humanity. We need to stay behind doors to beat this, but we also want to help
those in need. “Virtual volunteering offers an easy way to create social
impact, while remaining indoors and safe — you don’t even have to get out of
your pyjamas,” said Andy Hadfield, CEO of forgood. Forgood has launched a dedicated #Coronavirus campaign,
which aims to highlight all the relevant needs that are posted daily by the
400-plus non-profit organisations signed up on the platform. “The key is
finding a place where your particular skills are needed,” said Hadfield.