In the first week of the lockdown in South Africa more than 87 000 cases of gender-based-violence (GBV) were reported to the police. Against this sobering backdrop, as their contribution to the fight against the global Covid-19 pandemic, the University of KwaZulu-Natal’s Corporate Relations department held a webinar to tackle the psychosocial impact of the virus during the lockdown. A panel of scholars, invited by the institution, argued that while everyone is affected by the Covid-19 pandemic, the impact may be felt by some more than others. Tackling the topic of GBV in the time of Covid-19, Professor Relebohile Moletsane said over and above the 87 000 cases reported, many more victims couldn’t and didn’t report the abuse. “So, it’s not difficult to conclude that the lockdown spelled doom to the victims of gender-based violence at various homes across the country. This includes girls, women and many gender nonconforming people. Even before the lockdown, we were doing a shoddy job of addressing GBV and protecting victims,” Moletsane said. She said strategies by the Department of Social Development’s GBV Command Centre have been available and continue to be available. Moletsane said the department’s strategies assume that the victims have access to the Internet, airtime and data, leaving a large portion of the population not catered for. “Arguably, before the lockdown, you could also run to your neighbours, friends or relatives to escape and report, but in the context of lockdown, this is not be possible. “Also, with those with access to technology, the abuser is sitting with you in the house and is likely watching who calls you and who you call.” She said a number of South African and international activists have come up with creative strategies using mostly their social media. “On her twitter account for example, Rosie Motene [a GBV activist] has suggested that we use code words. For example, when I am being abused in the house, I can post code words and my contacts will know I need held. “For example, ‘my Tupperware order’, and if you add your address your contacts will know that you want them to call the police.” Moletsane suggested that cashiers at pharmacies and grocery stores could be trained to listen to people who reported abuse to them and relay the message to authorities. “What if, instead of beating people up on the street, the police and the army actually patrolled neighbourhoods listening to screams and cries for help. All I am saying is that the lockdown requires us to think creatively about how we make vulnerable people safe ...” she said. Professor Nirmala Gopal spoke about the psychosocial needs of women in informal settlements and called for a human agenda to be created to deal with such issues during and after Covid-19. Gopal said Covid-19 has provided academics and researchers in the humanities space with an opportune time to create an agenda that responds to the challenges that are experienced by women, especially in informal settlements. She said these challenges are psychological, social and economic. Gopal said over seven million South African citizens live in informal settlements. “We need to ask ourselves if we are being serious when we believe that social distancing is practical for women in informal settlements.” BEING ABUSED BY YOUR PARTNER? HERE’S HOW TO GET HELPThe call centre number for victims of or witnesses to gender based violence is  0800 428 428 or sms ‘help’ to 31531, or send a please call me to *120*7867#.There is also a Skype service for the deaf community.  