Hello everyone. You all okay? I’m still here, banging away on my keyboard in my TV room.
It’s nice. The birds are singing outside, the sun streams in and my WiFi is
behaving for now. I think by now many of us are more used to this strange way
of life, boxed into our homes. We’re adjusting and that whole cognitive
dissonance thing about all this is starting to ease. I went out for the first time to get some essentials on
Easter Sunday. What a treat! I wore a coolish dress because it was a hot day,
with my purple buff as a nod to a mask. My buff was pulled up to below my eyes, and I looked not
unlike a crazed-looking criminal with little fashion sense. The fashion police
should have been summoned under normal circumstances. I should have felt
ridiculous, but, there was no self-consciousness at all. By the time I got back to my car, I was so claustrophobic, I
ripped the buff off as fast as I could. About half the people I saw were masked up with proper
shop-bought masks. Only a small handful wore makeshift or home-made masks. I
wonder why more aren’t doing this? These strange times have prompted some odd behaviour and new
rituals. I’ve noticed that the guy and I are far more focused on food. Usually, we pay scant attention to this, as work and other
stuff fill our lives. But in this time void of busyness, we have time to focus
on food again, prepare it properly and savour it. Our day starts with a proper breakfast rustled up by the guy
while I take part in the 8.15 am online news conference. What luxury to dine at
breakfast time. We don’t do that when we work. Eggs, avo (thank goodness for
our magnificent trees), toast, tomatoes, etc. It’s a new habit we have easily
got used to. At teatime, my home-made rusks come out. And I allow myself
two. Or three. Or even four. (The scale is not impressed.) Lunchtime is proper
food like home-made soup or a bean curry cooked by the guy, or leftover pizza
or supper from the night before. If sandwiches are made, which is seldom,
they’re of the fancy variety which an abundance of time for preparation allows. Supper nowadays consists of freshly cooked vegetables, a
protein and a pudding. Almost every single night. We’ve poached fruit in syrupy
sauces, we make custard as often as we can, and we make it all from scratch.
There’s no scope for instant meals, no desire for fast food. It’s a luxury I
will miss when this is over and work schedules mean we can’t do it. In efforts to eke out our wine, we’ve switched to some of
the neglected bottles in the booze basket. (Other more refined people have
liquor cabinets. When we moved almost three years ago now, all the booze
bottles went into a big sturdy basket for transportation to the new place, and
there they’ve stayed.) I found a fancy gin (the one I kept for special occasions
and ended up never using) and on a cold and rainy night this week, we each had
a ginger square to cheer us up (oh, the sweet nostalgia in that taste!). Other unusual behaviour includes me walking manically around
the garden, double time to try to get steps in, doing star jumps on the lawn or
cycling while singing at the top of my voice on my spinning bike at lunchtime
(it’s still not enough to make up for the kilojoules I’ve packed in). The guy has developed an affinity for his ladder that drives
my stress levels straight up the wall. He has a cavalier attitude when it comes
to heights I think, and he’s up it every day fixing things, installing things
and generally risking his life and setting my nerves on edge. I find there are
only so many times I can say “be careful”. So for that alone, I’ll be happy when this lockdown is over. Weekends are now a hive of cleaning, washing and scrubbing,
and I confess I have loved it! I pride myself that even though it’s over a
month since my domestic worker was here, I’ve managed not to put one thing in
the ironing pile. I’ve spent time dusting my beautiful bits and pieces and
found an extra appreciation for them as I’ve held them and turned them over,
remembering each one’s provenance. (I wonder if the novelty of this will fade
in time?) Both the guy and I have found that our dreams have been
vivid, strange and invaded by Covid-19 noise. I dream of social distancing, people breaking lockdown and
those who are isolated. I also dream of illness and discord. And my dreams come
in strong images which stay with me all day. Interestingly, an interview on CNN this week clarified why
this is. According to Jason Ellis, a professor of sleep science at
Northumbria University, it’s not so much that we’re dreaming more, but that
we’re waking up more often during the night and remembering the dreams. He said the uncertainty we are facing and the changes in our
daily habits, lead to us getting poorer sleep. He said many people are reporting dreams that go back into
their memories and “fantastic dreams where people are trying to emotionally
problem solve the issues they’re going through”. He said one person described a dream in which a talking
giraffe was telling people how to move safely around a supermarket. This person
also revealed that in his childhood, going to the zoo was a favourite
experience. Ellis said dreams help us get over emotional issues. He stressed that if people are remembering more it means
they’re waking up more during the night and he advised that we try to keep our
sleep routine much like it was previously. Get out of bed at the same time each morning, and put the
day to bed before you go to bed. With many of us working from home our hours may be a bit
erratic. Separate work and rest. For those consuming more alcohol than they normally
do — which is wrong at this time on so many levels really, so you should stop
if you are — this can make you wake up more frequently late at night and so we
remember our dreams more. Last night, I dreamt I was on the back of a motorbike with a
man I didn’t know driving it. He was doing 203 km per hour and I was scared. I
also realised I wasn’t wearing a helmet. He wouldn’t slow down. Hah! Feast on
that Freud. Classic insecurity isn’t it. While we all try to present that stiff upper lip, our
psyches are letting us know we are worried at some level. And maybe, when we
dream, it’s a place for that anxiety to play out. As I write this, in the shadow of World’s View I can hear
the drone of the highway in the background. It’s much more muted than normal,
but it’s there. It helps remind me that there is a world out there and that
we’re still connected to it somehow. I just wonder when I’ll get to see it
again. Maybe even from the back of the guy’s bike at a sensible speed with a
view of the Midlands on the horizon. I can’t wait. 