The University of KwaZulu-Natal (UKZN) says it is exploring plans for the resumption of the academic programme amid the extended national lockdown. In its efforts to salvage the first semester, which at the beginning of the year was also marred by some violent student protests, the university said it was looking at the possibility of online teaching and learning. In a statement, Norma Zondo, UKZN acting spokesperson, said: “University management is working to guard against further loss of teaching time and ensure the academic programme continues. “The Covid-19 pandemic has delivered a crisis, but we still have room for manoeuvre — a chance to realise our ambitions by mobilising our resources and acting swiftly and creatively.” Zondo said UKZN is exploring and planning for multiple scenarios with regard to the resumption of the currently suspended academic programme. “All the scenarios considered are guided by the need to act against the possibility of losing a portion of the academic year or extending the academic year beyond December 2020.” She said the start of online learning will be decided on following further discussions and consultations with the student community. “In the meantime, we have initiated a process to transfer all our academic course material onto virtual platforms, for completion at the end of April 2020. Every effort will be made to ensure we find creative solutions to overcome issues around access to technological devices as we progress our online strategy.” The university is currently running an online survey to establish whether students would have access to the online learning portal. While some students welcome the efforts by the university, others took to the UKZN SRC Facebook page to raise concerns about steep data prices while others said they did not have laptops or Internet connections. Sumeya Khumalo said: “We do not want the semester to be wasted, and we accept e-learning if it will be implemented in a way that will accommodate all students, including those coming from economically disadvantaged backgrounds.” Khumalo suggested that the university should allow students to return to their respective residences. “Of course this must be optional, so those who feel they can survive e-learning at home must remain at home and those who can only cope with e-learning when on campus must return to campus. “Those from rural areas will not be able to study online because they have no network. Most students (black in particular) cannot afford the data required for e-learning. Some students are from unstable homes which have no conducive environment for studying. These are the realities that confront many students when they are at home.” Another student said: “We have to be honest that the online strategy will not work for everyone. “I stay in a remote area and struggle to get Internet connection. We come from different households and for others the environment is not conducive.” Luyanda Bobby Nkomo said: “Those students who have appealed for NSFAS, where are they supposed to get money to buy data for online learning? “This concept of online learning is anti-black, some students, due to the different backgrounds and quantiles they come from, need lecturers to explain to them. This online learning thing is not going to work. There are people who come from deep rural areas where there is no network, how will they learn?” UKZN SRC president Sifiso Simelane said that no online learning is currently taking place. “A communique with the way forward will be sent after submissions or proposals about serving the current academic year are finalised.” Simelane implored students to report lecturers or tutors asking them for online submissions.