As citizens grapple with Covid-19 questions following
President Cyril Ramaphosa’s much-anticipated speech delivered on Thursday,
political analysts are equally not sure what the government is planning to do
come May 1. The Western Cape University political scientist’s Professor
Bheki Mngomezulu said Ramaphosa’s speech had failed to offer citizens the
certainty which they desperately required during the difficult Covid-19
lockdown period. “What is confusing is that he indicated that decisions on
how the restrictions would be eased would be made after inputs from various
stakeholders. “If that were to be the case then the only logical thing was
for him to wait for the consultative process to be exhausted before addressing
citizens. I think he made his speech prematurely,” he said. In his speech, Ramaphosa indicated that some restrictions,
including on the sale of cigarettes, 
would be lifted as part of the relaxed lockdown rules due to kick in on
May 1. However, he did not shed light on many other aspects of the lockdown,
including on whether the sale of alcohol would be allowed. He also announced that more businesses would be allowed to
operate under the less stricter Covid-19 level 4 lockdown due to start at
month-end. However, Ramaphosa’s statement left millions currently
without income, after the companies they work for cannot operate due to the
lockdown, wondering whether they would be allowed to resume work come May 1. Ramaphosa indicated that ministers would provide more
details on the relaxed measures in the coming days. Professor Susan Booysen, the director of research at the
Mapungubwe Institute, was equally unimpressed with the president’s approach.
“He has slipped up into not using the opportunity to convey substantive content
and directions.” While political commentator, Ralph Mathekga, agreed that
Ramaphosa’s speech had failed to meet public expectations, he said the
president was not entirely to blame. “While the citizens’ questions are well founded, we should
also acknowledge the fact that we are not living under a normal situation, it’s
an emergency.” Ramaphosa’s spokesperson, Khusela Diko, could not be reached
for comment.