Msunduzi is not offering a payment holiday for utility bills because the Covid-19 lockdown has placed strain on the City’s coffers. Mayor Mzimkhulu Thebolla and the head of finance, Nelisiwe Ngcobo, said the City will scramble to meet its financial commitments if customers continue not paying their utility bills. “Regardless of whatever is happening, we have to collect from our customers so that we can pay for the services Eskom and Umgeni Water provide in order to be able to continue supplying them,” said Thebolla. He said Msunduzi is not in a position to give “a payment holiday” to its customers. This is because its finances were not in the best state even before lockdown due to poor revenue collection, which is one of the reasons it was placed under administration. “The municipality’s survival is dependent on revenue collection. When we do the budget it is based on projections in terms of the revenue we expect to collect and expenses that money will fund. The lockdown has really derailed our plans,” said Ngcobo. She fears Msunduzi might be forced to scramble in order to meet its financial commitments come month-end. These are primarily bulk purchases for water and electricity as well as paying contractors that assist the City’s infrastructure department with maintenance and repairs. Ngcobo said last month the City did not feel the impact of the lockdown as the majority of customers paid for the services and rates as they normally would. However, the municipality is already feeling the pinch this month-end. “We couldn’t even manage to collect R100 million after the mid-month payday and that’s unheard of for us. Normally by that time we would be sitting at about 70% of our monthly collection. “We really had to scramble to pay this month’s salaries. Our average monthly collection is around R360 million and we hadn’t even reached 50% when we had to release salaries,” she said. Msunduzi’s cash flow problems are compounded by the rapidly escalating debtors book, which hovers around R4 billion. To try and get back its money from defaulters, in November the City brought in a panel of debt collectors. However, Ngcobo said there was nothing much they could do during the lockdown. “Under normal circumstances we would go out and disconnect but this time we can’t because the lockdown regulation prevents us from doing that. But the problem remains, how do we continue providing the essential services if people have not paid us?” Ngcobo said she also did not know how the City is going to pay the service providers who assist with the maintenance and repairs for water and lights. She is also anticipating collecting less revenue on prepaid metres as a result of people not being able to afford to buy tokens and illegal connections that continue to plague the City. “I could be dealing with those illegal connections right now. There is a strategy in place but we can’t do anything right now until the lockdown is lifted.” THE RESERVES She said the situation might force the municipality to dig into its meagre reserves. “If we take whatever is left in the reserves this month what are we going to do next month or the one after because there is a possibility that people will still be on lockdown. I’m hoping that we at least collect R250 million this month so that we don’t use up all our reserves because that also come with its own risks for the municipality if the reserves are completely depleted.” She said Covid-19 has placed further strain on Msunduzi’s finances because the municipality has to fund the response programmes until national and provincial government can give them money. EQUITABLE SHARE Regarding the equitable share grant from National Treasury, Ngcobo said they receive it in tranches and the next allocation is only due in July. She said national government must consider bringing the July allocation forward to assist municipalities during this period. “This is not just a Msunduzi problem, most of my peers are also faced with this problem. So maybe National Treasury must release about R100 million or whatever percentage to each municipality to supplement whatever little they manage to collect.” Asked if there was no other backup plan, Ngcobo said all she could do was to beg the people of Msunduzi to pay their municipal bills. She has even started sending out text messages to consumers. She said the pay offices, including the satellites ones in Northdale and Sobantu, are open for people to come and pay. Payments can also be made at various supermarkets including Shoprite, Pick n Pay, Spar and Checkers. Customers are also advised to make use of the online direct payment facility. Msunduzi banks with FNB and is a pre-loaded beneficiary. Those who have not received their statements can send an e-mail with their account number to billing@msunduzi.gov.za.