The skies are blue, the air is clean and you can breathe
much better! Air pollution throughout the world has plummeted since the
lockdown and in Pietermaritzburg it’s no different. Msunduzi Municipality’s environmental health services, under
Clive Anthony, monitors the air quality and has found that there has been a
significant reduction of criteria pollutants being monitored. The sidebar below
indicates by how much the levels of pollutants dropped during the lockdown. Msunduzi spokesperson Thobeka Mafumbatha said the main
emission sources (prior to the lockdown) were attributed to vehicles, sitting
at 88%; industry at nine percent; biomass burning two percent and domestic fuel
one percent. During lockdown, there has been a significant reduction in
the number of vehicles on the roads. In addition, only essential services industries
are permitted to operate. The reduction of pollution may be directly related to
this, said Mafumbatha. She said all air monitoring stations in the country are
green and indicating a healthy environment(between one and four). Since long-term exposure to high levels of the pollutants is
associated with negative impacts on human health, the further reduction of
pollutants during the lockdown has certainly benefited the public at large. Rico Euripidou, environmental health campaigner at
groundWork, said the way the air has cleaned up in some places is a remarkable
testament to how unsustainable the “normal” economy and “normal” development
is. In many places around the world, young people are seeing a
clear blue sky for the first time. And millions of people with asthma are
breathing easier. The benefits of the reduction in air pollution is partial
and short term in SA because many of the dirtiest plants, including Eskom’s big
power stations, Sasol’s synfuels and chemical plants, and Sapref — the country’s
biggest oil refinery — are still pumping out pollution. It’s also short term elsewhere because governments and big
corporations want the “normal” world back again. “The poor and most vulnerable suffer most from the health
impacts of air pollution and climate change, and they will suffer most from
Covid-19 and the economic crisis. That will be used to justify a return to
normal, but it is precisely the normal economy that made them poor and
vulnerable in the first place”. Euripidou said cleaner air in SA for a few months may be a
“tiny silver lining” ahead of the anticipated Covid-19 epidemic fallout, and
will do little in the long run to solve the problem of outdoor air pollution.
“... Some scientific studies have even found associations that airborne particulate
matter may help to spread the virus.” He added that during the SARS outbreak in China, a study by
researchers at UCLA’s School of Public Health showed that patients with SARS
were more than twice as likely to die from the disease if they came from areas
of high pollution. The same seems true of Covid-19: the more air pollution you
are exposed to, the sicker you are likely to get. A Harvard study has just
found the first correlation between air pollution and Covid-19 deaths in the
USA, he added. Patrick Dowling of the Wildlife and Environment Society of
South Africa (Wessa) Governance group said that in his opinion KZN is
undoubtedly benefitting from the massive slow-downs in vehicle volumes,
commercial flights, electricity demand, mining and industrial production even
though this has had obvious impacts on the economy.