The lockdown has been a blessing in disguise for Pietermaritzburg’s homeless, who are now using the assistance offered at the shelters to deal with their drug addiction and trauma from their past. Mayor Mzimkhulu Thebolla said two shelters — for males in Mayor’s Walk and females in Abattoir Road — were initially established after council resolved to do something to protect the homeless from the scourge of Covid-19, but they are now using them to address the social ills faced by those living on the streets. The shelters, which are managed by the KZN Christian Council (KZNCC) on behalf of Msunduzi, house a total of almost 300 homeless people but the numbers keep increasing as more are brought in. The plan is to secure another venue as neighbouring municipalities are also planning to bring their homeless to Msunduzi. This is also to prevent overcrowding in order to ensure that the social distancing regulation is adhered to. “It’s not an easy task because most of them are battling with drug addiction, but we are not backing down from the challenge and we are doing everything we can to help them through this. My hope is that we help get at least 30% off the streets by the time they leave here,” said Thebolla. He said that some have already been taken back to their homes to be reunited with their families and others want to be rehabilitated first before the mediation with their loved ones begins. “We ended up here because of Covid-19, but this has given us an opportunity to address another problem that has been plaguing our society.” The mayor said some try to flee to go back to the streets, and the drug dealers were also not letting up in their attempts to infiltrate the shelters. There are health professionals and social workers on site every day so that when newcomers arrive they are screened for Covid-19, then checked for any other illnesses that require medical attention, such as TB and mental health issues. They are also given methadone to manage whoonga withdrawal and then the social workers start the counselling process, which also delves into how they ended up leaving home and if they want to be reunited with their families. Msunduzi council allocated R3 million for the emergency disaster fund when the lockdown was effected, but Thebolla said it is also through the support of the provincial government, local businesses and individuals that the City has been able to clothe, feed and ensure that the group has the necessary hygiene products to protect them from Covid-19. “This has really united the people of Msunduzi, we had people from all walks of life offering help. It’s been really incredible to witness such kindness but we are now once again pleading for more help since the lockdown has been extended and we actually don’t know how long they are going to be here for.” In order to ensure that the shelters are properly managed, Msunduzi appointed the KZNCC as an anchor NGO to receive any donations for the purpose of distributing to the poor and vulnerable. Thebolla said all the donations must be handed to the KZNCC offices as they need to be assessed on whether they are appropriate to be given to those living at the shelters. “We are not taking everything that people bring because we are mindful of the fact that drug lords are looking to expand their businesses even here, so everything that donors bring has to be screened.” Thebolla’s only regret is that the City has not been able to reach all the homeless as some hide from the police and others are on the outskirts of Pietermaritzburg. KZNCC’s Dr Douglas Dziva said they are in desperate need of winter clothes and things that can keep the people at the shelter entertained while they are there, such as books, newspapers and magazines. “There is not much to do here during the day so recreational activities are the main thing that we also need. “We would like them to be informed and to be aware of what is happening in the world. For example, many of them didn’t even know that the lockdown had been extended.” He said 50 clergy ministers are there to offer spiritual guidance for those who need such as part of the care that is offered. “We are also advocating for them by engaging with local businesses to offer skills training such as cooking, baking, sewing and other skills that could help them sustain themselves after lockdown.” Dziva said the biggest challenge at the moment is gathering resources to get them through the lockdown, and urged the public to come forward to assist. “If we can’t feed or clothe them they will have an excuse to escape and not come back. At the moment we are finding that some will escape and come back by themselves when they realise that we are actually trying to help them. Most of them are really appreciative of this initiative and it’s giving them hope about their future.” City general manager for community services Mbongeni Mathe said security have their hands full trying to prevent some of the group from escaping or engaging in illegal activities. He said fights broke out on a regular basis and there are also incidents of theft as well as attempts to smuggle in drugs and weapons. “We even had an incident where copper water pipes were also stolen. It can be frustrating at times but we are not giving up on any of them. “What also makes it worth it is when we see some of them functioning well without drugs and even showing interest in getting jobs when they get out of here.” Mathe said Msunduzi has been engaging with some local businesses to take in some of the former vagrants after lockdown for skills training and internship opportunities. “We have people who have degrees and others with several distinctions who have been living on our streets for years when they could have been productive members of society. “We are not forcing anyone to change but we are doing everything we can to help those who want better than what they had before coming to the shelter, but it must be their decision,” he said. Spokesperson for the homeless, Mlungisi* (29), said most of them want to go back to their families because they feel that they are ready to face them again. He said the nurses and social workers have really assisted with trauma counselling and getting some of his peers on chronic medication for illnesses some did not even know they had. “Coming here has really helped many of us regroup and start thinking about our futures again, which is something we don’t have a luxury of doing on the streets. When you are out there you are all about hustling for your next fix and maybe something to eat.” He said his drug of choice was cocaine but most of his peers were into whoonga because it is easily accessible. Mlungisi, who originally hails from Durban’s Umlazi township, ended up on Pietermaritzburg’s streets after he could not find a job following his release from prison more than six years ago. He said he lost out on work opportunities when potential employers found out about his criminal record of robbery. “Most of us were pushed to the streets by the hardships we faced — it wasn’t by choice. For some it was abuse, for others like myself it was the stigma of having a criminal record and there are those who also struggled with addiction and could not get help.” While he commended the care at the shelter, Mlungisi is concerned that someone is going to get hurt during clashes with the security guards. He said some of his peers are frustrated by various things and they want to leave — to either go home or back to the streets — but they are not being allowed to leave. “The security guards also hit people with their sticks, they are abusing their power and we’ve raised this with the shelter management but nothing has been done. My fear is that someone is going to retaliate and that could result in a brawl because others will get involved.” Mathe denied that the guards abused their power but conceded that the clashes between the groups are a safety concern. He said these erupted when some are trying to escape from the shelter or smuggle in contraband. “Some also bring in knives and fights break out when the guards try to confiscate them. In terms of allowing them to leave, we can only allow someone to go home once a parent comes and signs that he or she will be in their care. We obviously not going to let them go back out on the streets and risk contracting Covid-19.” * Not his real name. 