“You don’t have to go back to living on the streets after the lockdown.” That was a commitment made by the Department of Social Development (DSD) MEC Nonhlanhla Khoza to the almost 300 young people living at Msunduzi’s homeless shelter in Prestbury on Monday. She visited the centre to assess the living conditions as well as find out what programmes the City and the local DSD had in place to assist the street people in rebuilding their lives. The municipality, working with non-profit organisations and other stakeholders, is not only providing them with temporary shelter, clothing, food and even toiletries, they are also being assisted with medication as many are trying to wean themselves from drugs. Social workers are also working with them to deal with emotional trauma that led to them leaving their homes. Mayor Mzimkhulu Thebolla said his hope is that none of the shelter’s occupants will return to the street after the lockdown. “We know that all of them have different reasons why they left their homes, but it is our hope that, even those who don’t go back to their families, they can at least be assisted to gain some financial independence,” he said. Khoza assured Thebolla and the group that the DSD would be in a position to assist. She said social workers would mediate with families of those who wanted to go back home and the department also had rehabilitation facilities for those who wanted to deal with their drug addiction. Khoza said the provincial government also had youth academies they could refer them to where they would be trained in various skills. “But I must emphasise that it can’t be our decision to say you must stop living in the street or stop doing drugs. You have to first decide yourself then we will then do whatever possible to help you achieve whatever it is that you want in life,” she said. Khoza said the department would be sending more items to the centre such as blankets as the occupants currently had one each. Speaking on behalf of the street people, Londeka Cele said it was hard when they first arrived at the shelter because they had a lot of issues to deal with. “Thank you for not giving up on us. The people here are looking after us very well. We feel cared for,” she said,