With retirement villages and frail care facilities in lockdown, the elderly are relying more than ever on carers and nursing staff. Among those on this frontline in the Covid-19 battle is Dudu Dlamini, who works as a carer in the frail care facility at Amberglen Retirement Village in Howick. “I have been a carer for 15 years,” she said. “I have a passion for helping people and keeping residents happy, especially those whose families are far away. “I feel it is important to be with the residents at this time because most of them are frail. We help them and we need to keep them safe because they are old.” Dlamini admits she worries about the virus, but does her best to limit any possible risk of catching it and passing it on to her family and the residents in her care by maintaining a strict hygiene regime. “I wash my hands and sanitise them,” she explained. “When I reach home my uniform is kept in a separate washing basket and I shower before I do anything. I also wear a mask for each shift.” Also working hard to help patients is Cynthia (surname withheld on her request), a nurse who has worked at the care centre for the last four-and-a-half years and has been a nurse for almost 30 years. “I was basically born a nurse. I love people and all living creatures. It was a natural progression into the service of nursing after school,” she said. Asked why she felt it was important to work with the elderly during the lockdown, Cynthia said they needed love and care. “Those in our care are particularly frail and some of their families are far away and overseas,” she added. Like Dlamini, Cynthia maintains a strict hygiene protocol. “I shower and change clothes immediately on arrival at home. My work clothes are washed separately and they are in their own wash basket. “I have been tirelessly educating my family and friends over WhatsApp. “I also keep myself updated on a regular basis with all developments in the medical field pertaining to my specific type of nursing; and I sanitise my hands regularly and wear a mask.”