Traditional healers have expressed concerns about their
livelihoods as they have been forced to cancel appointments and send away
patients during the national lockdown period. Makhosi Sebenzile Msomi, chairperson of the Amakhosi council
in the uMgungundlovu District and also the secretary of the provincial
Traditional Healers Practitioners, told Weekend Witness that after extensive
deliberations, it was decided that all traditional healers should also stop
working during the lockdown. “We saw that it wasn’t going to be wise to carry
on working, as that would have meant we are going against the government’s
directive and that we don’t care for our patients’ lives and our families.” She said they would limit movements and interactions while
those in power try to come up with solutions. “We decided that it was important
that we adhere to the lockdown rules by not practising during this period.
Fortunately, most of our patients call in advance to make appointments or to
enquire about our availability, so we can just tell them over the phone that we
are also on lockdown and will only be available after the lockdown.” She said there were some people who just show up on their
doorsteps, and that in those situations it is up to individual traditional
healers to show their responsibility by informing their patients about the
virus and the risk of them spreading it by not being at home, and then turning
them away. Msomi said only in a life-threatening situation, where it is
clear that if they don’t intervene a life could be lost, then they will
operate. “But even in a life-threatening situation, people should take all the
necessary hygienic precautionary steps, such as social distancing, washing hands
and sanitising to ensure that they minimise chances of spreading the virus,”
she said. Msomi said they decision means they would be living without
an income for three weeks as many traditional healers had no other form of
income. She also urged all traditional healers to unite in fighting
the pandemic. But local traditional healer, Makhosi Thando “Pimpdlozi”
Khambule, said it was unfair that they were not allowed to operate while
Western doctors were. Khambule said shortly after the lockdown, business was so
bad that in a week he had only four patients who visited his home to consult,
which is the lowest number since he started practising as a traditional healer
four years ago. “I was shocked ... This virus has halted our business. With
the lockdown, it’s even hard to go and find muti as we get it in the deep rural
areas. Since the government has deployed police officers and the army, it’s
impossible for us to get by and I see this as an abuse of our practise.” Khambule said it was unfair that Western doctors and
chemists were allowed to operate as normal, and were even being given personal
protective equipment, and they were not. He said the majority of black people
actually preferred consulting with a traditional healer rather than a Western
doctor.  “It seems as if our government
does not care for traditional healers because we should also be given
permission to operate as we are also an essential service,” said Makhosi Khambule. 