Thirteen-year-old Andile Bhengu told The Witness on Tuesday that he is “super excited” to be starting high school on Wednesday. The Witness has been reporting on Andile’s first day of school every year since he was five years old. The journey began in 2012 when the young boy started Grade R at Sombongangani Primary School, and then he went on to start Grade 1 at Langsyde Primary. Also read: Andile’s long walk to Grade R Andile began his high school career on Wednesday at Langsyde High School. He said he is not feeling nervous at all because he already knows some people at the school. “I am not scared of anything. I am used to the pupils from there because they were at my primary school before,” he said. The pupil also told The Witness that he had nothing to worry about as he was going to begin this journey with all his friends. Andile was busy on Tuesday with his final preparations. He said his uniform was sorted out, and he couldn’t wait to use his new stationery. “I’m a big boy now who will be wearing a blazer!” he said excitedly. Andile added that he is looking forward to taking part in his favourite sports — soccer and running. “I love racing people and I am very fast,” he boasted. The young man’s mom, Nomusa Bhengu, told The Witness that despite the tragic loss of his beloved uncle, Bonginkosi Sosibo, last year, Andile still managed to do well academically. “His uncle’s death affected him. He loved him so much,” said the mother. “He used to help me with my maths homework. I managed to pass because of his help. I miss him,” said Andile. He then told The Witness that he achieved great marks for Zulu and English, and that those are the subjects he enjoys the most. As excited as he is to start the new year, the youngster said he wished the holidays could have been a little longer because he was still enjoying “chilling” with his friends. He said he had spent most of his summer holidays swimming at Siyo’s — a B&B with a pool near his home in Elands­kop. “When I wasn’t swimming, I was riding my horse Mkhonto, or just watching TV at home,” he said.  Andile Bhengu (13) riding his horse ‘Mkhonto’ these past holidays. 