An Imbali family were literally left holding the baby after moving a young girl, believed to be a year old, from a road where she was allegedly abandoned by her mother on New Year’s Day. Police are now appealing for help to find the baby’s mother. The girl’s saviour, a 19-year-old woman who spoke to The Witness on condition of anonymity, said she was driving home with her mother just after 6.30 pm when they came across a young woman, wearing a red top and jeans, pushing a pram a few houses away from their home on Maphanga Road in Imbali CC. “It was drizzling so my mom and I commented on how it was wrong for the woman to expose her child to the rain like that.” “When we got to our gate I got out of the car and opened the gate. When I was walking back to the car, I looked up and saw the child’s pram rolling down the road. “At first I just froze because I wasn’t sure if the child was inside the pram. I then saw the child’s head pop out on the side of the pram and heard her crying. “I panicked and ran to the pram fearing that some speeding or drunk driver might drive into the pram,” she said. She said the woman who they had seen pushing the pram earlier was nowhere to be seen. She said three young men who had also seen the woman before she disappeared went around the neighbourhood looking for the woman, but couldn’t find her. “My parents also drove around looking for her but it was like she just disappeared into thin air. My dad suspects that she might have gotten into a taxi,” she said. She said while her parents were driving around looking for the woman, she took the child into their home to keep her warm. “When we were inside the house the child started crying and I think she was scared. I gave her Ultramel to eat. She seemed very hungry,” she said. She said a bag, with two nappies, an empty milk bottle and a few clothes, was found inside the pram. The child was clean, well-dressed and appeared to be healthy, showing that she was being well taken care of. “We really don’t know why the mother abandoned her baby, it makes no sense.” After searching for the mother without success and asking their neighbours if they knew the baby, the family took the child to the Plessislaer police station and were referred to Edendale Hospital. When they got there, they were told that the hospital no longer had a ward for lost or abandoned children and referred back to the police station where their statement was taken, and they left the child. “Throughout the night she was stuck to me. She wanted me to carry her or to sit on my lap. At some point she was laughing and mumbling happily, she had no idea of what was happening. When we left her with the police, she smiled and waved at us. “As traumatic as it was, I’m glad that it was us who found her and not evil or drunk people. “I hope her mother is found and that she is reunited with her family soon,” said the young woman. Pietermaritzburg police spokesperson Sergeant Mthokozisi Ngobese appealed to anyone who might know the identity or the whereabouts of the mother or any relatives to report it to the police on 10111, or to call him directly on 082 826 8954. “We would also like to warn people that abandoning your child is a serious crime,” he said.