The principal at the Edendale Technical High School, Tobias Ngubane, was delighted on Tuesday that some of his pupils were being counted among those who did exceptionally well provincially and nationally. Edendale Technical High School pupil Bhekamandaba Makhonza (17), from Esigodini, got eight distinctions and on Tuesday attended the 2019 National Senior Certificate Top Achievers award ceremony in Midrand, Johannesburg, for physical science, while his classmate, Samkelo Latha (18) also got eight distinctions. Principal Ngubane, who accompanied Bhekamandaba to the award ceremony on Tuesday, said he was very happy with his pupils’ performance. “Success is not about luck, a miracle or talent but it’s about hard work, dedication, direction and discipline. Every child has the potential to do wonders in any aspect of life. I am also very proud of my teachers and parents for their support and dedication too,” said Ngubane. Speaking to The Witness before receiving his award on Tuesday, Bhekamandaba said being invited to the national award ceremony did not come as a surprise to him. “Honestly I was expecting to do well because I have been working hard throughout my schooling years. I used to sit and compare my grades with those of the pupils who I watched on TV attending these awards and think that if I maintain my standard, this could be me one day,” he said. Bhekamandaba said he has been told that he has always been smart from a young age and despite having challenges at home during his matric year, he managed to pass with flying colours. “My mother got really sick last year and that affected me emotionally, but I didn’t allow it to affect my studies.” He came third in the country in physical science and third overall among pupils at quintile 4 schools. He plans to study actuarial science this year at the University of Cape Town. Samkelo, from Peace Valley, said he was happy that he and his classmate Bhekamandaba were able to uplift their school’s name and make their teachers proud. “I was expecting to do well but I wasn’t expecting to do so well that I am in the newspapers,” laughed Samkelo. He said despite not being able to study at home, he was able to study with some of his peers at a local library every day to ensure he obtained outstanding results. Samkelo said he plans on studying for a B Comm in Accounting at UKZN in Durban this year.