KwaZulu-Natal Premier Sihle Zikalala and ANC secretary-general Ace Magashule on Sunday strongly reiterated SOEs should stay under state control and blasted ANC members who supported their privatisation. They were addressing thousands of ANC supporters during the party’s 108th birthday celebrations at the Ugu Sports and Leisure Centre near Port Shepstone on Sunday. Zikalala urged those in government to prove the ANC struggle against apartheid was done in the interests of ordinary people and not to enrich just a few. He said the sacrifices of thousands of party members who lost their lives during the struggle would be in vain if the ANC failed to change people’s lives. “Those who lost their lives did it so that ordinary people could have access to food, jobs and enjoy the fruits of a true democracy. While the ANC has made some strides since coming into power in 1994, it is unacceptable that the majority of citizens in the province continue be terrorised by criminal gangs at their homes, workplaces and public spaces,” he said. Sunday’s event took place a short distance from the Shobashobane area where 19 ANC members were massacred by IFP supporters on Christmas day in 1995. Zikalala said the ANC would have failed the victims and their families if the party did not address poor service delivery. “As the ANC we have an obligation to build a state machinery capable of rendering decent services to our people,” he said. ANC supporters, who had arrived in buses, minibus taxis and private vehicles, cheered as Zikalala delivered his speech. Magashule, ANC Women’s League president Bathabile Dlamini, national executive committee members Senzo Mchunu, Nathi Mthethwa, and ANC Moses Mabhida Regional Task Team convener Thulani “Two-Ways” Xulu were among the party heavyweights who attended the event. Magashule, who took to the podium shortly after Zikalala, did not waste time in lashing out at those ANC members perceived to be in favour of the privatisation of key parastatals such as Eskom and South African Airways. “The ANC branches have spoken, our position is that Eskom should remain under the control of government. We want a developmental state. “Those calling for the privatisation of Eskom are deviating from the ANC conference resolutions. They are taking ANC members for granted. What do you take us for .... you think we are fools,” he said. It was suicidal, Magashule said, for any ANC leader to think that they were bigger than the ANC. “Look at what happened to the PAC, the United Democratic Movement, the Congress of the People and the EFF. Their leaders left the ANC thinking that the ANC will not survive without them. But look at what is happening to all those political parties, they are all going down,” he said. Magashule, who received a standing ovation from the more than 20 000 ANC supporters who attended the event, told the crowd to go back to their branches and work towards uniting the party. “We can’t afford to have a divided ANC because a divided ANC will divide the entire country, with serious consequences for our democracy and economy,” he said.