In the true spirit of ubuntu, the greater Edendale community
has banded together and will be building a house for the family of Esigodini’s
2019 top matriculant, Bhekamandaba Mkhonza. After giving Bhekamandaba a hero’s welcome following the
release of his matric results, residents started a media campaign to build the
family a house. Resident Golide Makha told Weekend Witness on Friday
that the social media campaign, which was launched early this month, continued
gaining traction. “Many people have come forward to offer donations. In the next
month or so, we should begin with the building work,” he said. Bhekamandaba’s remarkable story is one of resilience against
all odds. Despite the challenges of financial issues and an ill mother, he
bagged eight distinctions, was named the top-performing pupil in uMgungundlovu
district, and had the third-highest Physics marks in the country. The former Edendale Technical School pupil will be studying
actuarial science at the University of Cape Town this year. But how was he able to overcome when he was dealt with
life’s curve balls? “If you have a dream it becomes bearable. At the end of the
day it’s your life and although you didn’t choose it, giving up is not an
option,” he told Weekend Witness. Bhekamandaba, who has become an overnight sensation in the
close-knit community, shares a three-bedroom mud house with his unemployed
mother, Kholekile Shange, and his younger brother. All of them are reliant on
an R840 social grant and where possible Shange takes on piecemeal jobs as a
domestic worker. “It still feels like a dream that someone who is a nobody
like me can raise such a brilliant boy. “God has indeed raised me up,” Shange said, taking out
myriad trophies from a plastic packet collected over the years by Bhekamandaba. Despite their poor background, Shange told Weekend
Witness that she has always encouraged her son to focus on his schoolbooks. “Bheka has renewed my hope,” said Shange, beaming with
pride. “I didn’t have a chance to finish school. I dropped out in Standard 8
[Grade 10]. I always tell him to do better than I did. I tell him to work hard
and to always remember where he comes from. He was not born with a silver
spoon; therefore, he must work twice as hard.” She says Bhekamandaba has always been a “bright boy”. “... When he was in primary school, I thought his
intelligence was just a phase.” In September, Shange fell ill, and Bhekamandaba said that
was a trying time for the family. “It was a really tough. I had my trial
examinations and my mother was in and out of hospital. It was just an emotionally
stressful situation,” he said. He recalled how over the years, his mother had struggled to
pay for his school fees, to buy him his uniform and adequate studying material. “It’s been one problem after the other. Luckily, we never
went to bed hungry. I got an internal donor to cover my school costs and that
took the weight off her shoulders.” While many may view his intelligence as an extraordinary
gift, Bhekamandaba said it took “hard work and consistency”. “I spent three months doing revisions using past papers and
that’s how I was able to make it.