The organisers of the Capital City Marathon seem to have had
more luck attracting sponsors than entries for their first race in Maritzburg
next month. They are still far from their target of runners, as
confirmed at a press briefing in the city on Thursday. The race is scheduled to take place on Sunday, February 23,
starting at the City Hall and finishing at the new Msunduzi Athletics Stadium. The race will have three distances on offer — 42,2 km, 21,1
km and 10 km. At the initial launch function last year, the organisers of
the race, led by chairman Steve Mkasi, said they were targeting at least 8 000
runners. But with exactly a month away from the big day, the entries
for the race are reported to be fewer than 3 000. On Thursday, Mkasi’s group, which included Athletics South
Africa (ASA) president Aleck Skosana, called the media to give an update on
their readiness to host the race in the capital of Kwa-Zulu-Natal. It seems they are doing well with sponsors, as they
announced at least 10 backers for the race, including Msunduzi Municipality,
KZN Department of Sport and Recreation, Coca-Cola, Tsogo Sun, Deloitte, CTM,
Netcare, Umgeni Water. But Mkasi claimed they were not worried about the low
entries as they were confident of reaching their target of 8 000 by race day. “We are confident that the entries will go up, because now
we’ve also introduced hard-copy entry forms that people can use to enter the
race. “Before this, we were only using online systems and some of
the athletes were struggling with it,” said Mkasi. “And, as we know, some of the people like to do things at
the last minute, so we are expecting big numbers from today until February 3
[the final day for the early entries].” The organisers also promised that there will be a number of
top internationals from Kenya, the U.S. and Britain taking part in the new
race, but couldn’t divulge any names. The Witness understands that Zimbabwean runner Loveness
Madziva will be running. “The numbers that have been captured shows us that all the
provinces which are members of Athletics South Africa will have
representatives. “The nice thing is that the host province is leading and
that really makes us happy,” said Mkasi.