The mother of a prominent Pietermaritzburg florist was stabbed during a house robbery at her Scottsville home on Wednesday. Rani Ram (69), the mother of Sohana Ram, owner of Ram’s Flower Market, was stabbed in the arm and her domestic worker was assaulted as intruders made off with jewellery and cash. Five men were later arrested in Camperdown driving a white Toyota Camry. They had broken through some palisade fencing behind the house and two of the men, who were armed, accosted the domestic worker in the back yard. They beat her up, and then hit and stabbed Rani Ram. The men then hopped back over the fence and left in their waiting getaway car. Police sources told The Witness that the victims described the faces of the intruders to police and that information was used, along with other information, to locate the men in Camperdown. The arrests was made by SAPS organised crime and K9 units, and Magma Security. The company’s Shaheen Sulieman said they were informed of the robbery and began patrolling the N3 highway for the getaway car. This resulted in a short chase and the intruders were eventually nabbed near Camperdown. They were found with gas guns, knives and the items they stole. Sources said part of the home was covered in blood. Family members at the house declined to speak to The Witness. Rani Ram spent some time in casualty at a local hospital but was not kept overnight. Neighbours said the area faced a problem of people hopping over fences into residents’ yards. “We see a lot of these guys jumping the fence and stealing one or two things. As soon as you see them or report it on social media they run away quickly like springboks,” one neighbour said. “We don’t see much of this, where they get seen by [the people at home] but are still so brazen to still attack the people and steal things. We see sporadic incidents like this where they break into houses.” It is not the first time an elderly person has been accosted in their house in the area. Ram’s Flower Market has two branches, one in town and one on Chota Motala Road. They have been operating for more than 100 years.