Despite reports that the Eskom grid is stabilising, energy
experts have warned that South Africans should prepare themselves for the
worst, with regular rolling black-outs and stage 6 load-shedding as a result of
continuing problems at the power utility. This as municipalities are being told to make sure they have
plans in place for Stage 8 load-shedding, in the event of the low likelihood
that this may be required. Stage 8 has been provided for in the Msunduzi load-shedding
schedule and means four lots of outages of two hours each per day. But Msunduzi Municipality’s acting general manager for
infrastructure services Brenden Sivparsad has warned that while they have been
reassured by Eskom that stage 8 load-shedding was unlikely, it would be
disastrous for the municipality and city residents. Sivparsad said this was not
a unique problem to Msunduzi and that most municipalities would be affected in
the same way. Black-outs for extended periods, he said, would trigger most
municipal services to come to a halt. “From simple things like traffic lights, to the operation of
businesses and schools, to more detrimental things like water supply and
sanitation services, our systems would literally grind to a halt,” said
Sivparsad. Of great concern, said Sivparsad, was that it could trigger
sewage spills into the city’s rivers and streams as only two (one for water and
one for sanitation) of the 36 pump stations had back-up generators. “Most municipalities are in a similar situation. The pump
stations are too large to run off generators for more than an hour or two — and
extremely costly. “Even if funding was available, the existing infrastructure
does not allow for these diesel generators,” said Sivparsad. He said anything more than a one- to two-hour break spelled
“grave trouble”. “Sanitation is a big concern for me. The sumps [storage
areas] fill up and cannot be pumped out and neither can it be stored. So it can
only overflow — and that goes straight into our rivers and streams. Containing
this spillage and its disastrous effects is something we are planning around
should we go beyond Stage 4 load-shedding again.” Energy advisor Ted Blom said that unless the country
obtained additional capacity on the grid, people should brace themselves for
rolling blackouts and erratic electricity supply. “I am predicting major
blackouts primarily because of the high number of breakdowns,” said Blom. He said this was because of the numerous breakdowns caused
by poor coal quality and a lack of maintenance compounded by Eskom’s lack of
money to conduct proper maintenance on its power plants. Chris Yelland, managing director at EE Business Intelligence
that tracks demand and Eskom plant performance, said Eskom’s declining energy
availability factor (EAF) was cause for serious concern. He said unless there was a miraculous recovery, based on
data from 2019, there was a grim picture of ageing, under-maintained and
stressed power plants. The energy availability factor shows the percentage of
Eskom’s generation capacity that is available, taking into account planned
maintenance and unplanned breakdowns. “Last year hit a new record low of 67% (EAF) compared 2018’s
72%, while the last two weeks saw the figures dipping to 58%,” Yelland said. At the same time, he said, there was no need to be alarmist
as Eskom was involved with interventionist maintenance over the December
holiday period — and which was classified as unplanned plant breakdowns. “Several thousand megawatts of these unplanned breakdowns is
actually maintenance, but Eskom should have communicated it better to allay
fears,” he said. Having predicted an increased demand in the second week of
January as people return to work, Yelland said the real challenge was in the
third and fourth week of January and early February. “We can expect demand to ramp up by about 4 000 megawatts in
this period compared to the low that occurs in week 52 of 2019 — week 52 is
traditionally the lowest demand week of the year. “However, it is expected that in this period Eskom will then
utilise the 4 000 megawatts from the strategic maintenance they did over the
Christmas period,” said Yelland. Strategic maintenance, he said, however, was a short-term
fix and did not address Eskom’s need for deep-level maintenance. Yelland
forecast that the next two years will continue seeing periods of load-shedding
based on the constraints of supply and demand. Eskom: ‘Grid showing signs of stabilising’ On Friday, Eskom issued a notice saying the power grid was
showing signs of stabilising in the short term. Unplanned outages or breakdowns
stood at 11 576 MW and Eskom was working to reduce breakdowns to below
9 500 MW. “We also managed to preserve our diesel stock as we did not
have to operate the open cycle gas turbines today,” the power utility said.
Although no load-shedding is expected, the system is vulnerable and this might
change, it said. In addition, Eskom advised that their emergency resources
were adequate in case they needed to utilise them to supplement capacity. “Our summer maintenance plan continues unabated with two big
units at Hendrina and Lethabo going on scheduled maintenance today. “We have planned accordingly to ensure that their absence
does not destabilise the system. We are monitoring the system closely and we
will continue to give periodic updates on the status of the power system as
things may change at short notice,” said Eskom. Eskom, however, advised that a concerted collective effort
to reduce demand could help to avoid or lessen the level of loadshedding. It
advises the following to reduce household electricity consumption: • Set air-conditioners’ average temperature at 23° C • Switch off geysers over peak periods • Use the cold water tap rather than using the geyser every
time • Set your swimming pool pump cycle to run twice a day,
three hours at a time for optimal energy use • At the end of the day, turn off computers, copiers,
printers and fax machines at the switch. Avoid stand-by or sleep mode. ‘It will take years to recover’ Public Enterprises Minister Pravin Gordhan conceded on Friday that it would take a long time for Eskom to recover fully from the
damage caused by state capture. Gordhan was responding to a parliamentary
question from EFF chairperson MP Veronica Mente. Earlier this week, Eskom issued correspondence to all
municipalities asking them to plan for Stage 8 load-shedding although it was
not expected. The notice, sent to the municipalities, was in keeping with
Eskom’s obligations in terms of the Disaster Management Act that requires them
to develop a contingency plan for identified major incidents. 