Pietermaritzburg is filthy and it stinks, ANC heavyweights Zweli Mkhize and Blade Nzimande said on Wednesday in a rebuke to the city’s leadership and the ANC in the region. Mkhize and Nzimande were speaking at a wreath laying ceremony at the grave of the ANC stalwart Moses Mabhida in Imbali. They also laid wreaths at the graves of Harry Gwala in Swayimane, and Jabu Ndlovu and Josiah Gumede in Mountain Rise. This was part of the build-up of the ANC’s 108th birthday anniversary celebrations scheduled for Saturday. “What disturbs us is that Msunduzi (Pietermaritzburg) is filthy, it stinks. “It brings shame to us who come from the area when our cabinet colleagues tell of having to pass through Pie-termaritzburg because they often highlight how dirty the city is,” Nzimande said. He said the formation of a regional task team (RTT) in the Moses Mabhida region was indicative that the ANC had been weakened and the confidence of the people in the party had been eroded. “The biggest enemy of the ANC is the ANC itself. The truth must be told, let’s not take the ANC for granted. If we do wrong, we kill the ANC and the boers will come back into power. “We have failed the ANC in Pietermaritzburg. The RTT is also telling of that failure. It is also evident in the levels of filth around this city. You can see that the ANC is dead … It can’t even manage the municipality,” Nzimande said. Nzimande called for the unity in the movement and the tripartite alliance. Delivering his speech, Mkhize said it was concerning that the Moses Mabhida region was in disarray and had become deeply divided through factionalism, patronage, corruption, and competition for resources. “The ANC was not built for certain individuals. We will not accept an ANC where people are being killed because there are individuals who want to have their way in the party,” Mkhize said. “We cannot allow our municipalities to be turned into playgrounds for factionalism. That is insulting the masses and it is at the centre of what is killing the organisation.” “The city is very filthy. The filth does not mean there is a shortage of brooms … it’s telling of the type of leadership the city has. If you do your jobs well as leaders, it will show in the cleanliness of Church Street and the Market Square.”  City’s filth ‘a disgrace to ANC comrades’ “We can’t say we are here to revive the ANC while Pietermaritzburg is still filthy. It’s a disgrace to the fallen ANC comrades and we can’t allow it to happen,” Mkhize said. Speaking on the state of Mabhida and Johnny Makhithini’s graves, Mkhize said a decision had been taken by the municipality to remove the tombstones because the ground was soft and there were fears that they would cave in. He gave an assurance that the tombstones will be re-erected and the site developed into a heritage site. Last March the Mabhida and Makhathini families expressed anger over the decision by Msunduzi Municipality to remove tombstones from the struggle heroes’ graves. 