A self-employed woman was left frustrated after her WhatsApp
was hacked on Thursday afternoon and used to solicit money from her contacts
and clients. Zonke Hlongwane, from Westville, runs an online support
school group and sells Herbalife. She said on Thursday at around 3 pm she was busy on her
phone taking orders from clients and arranging payments, when she received an
SMS notification with a WhatsApp code that one gets when they are registering
onto the app. She ignored the message and continued with her business. A
short while later, Hlongwane received a WhatsApp message from an unsaved number
asking her to forward the SMS notification with the WhatsApp code. “I asked who the person was and they said I must look at
their profile picture, which was a woman I recognised from our Herbalife
seminars. The message said that I must please forward the code because she had
sent it to me by mistake. “At first I refused, but then I went and searched the number
on my WhatsApp and realised that the number was indeed in our Herbalife
WhatsApp group and my other groups, so I figured that the person was genuine
and just sent the code. “The minute I sent the code, my WhatsApp got blocked. I
received a message saying my WhatsApp was existing on another device.” On realising that her account had just been hacked,
Hlongwana called her husband and asked him to tell everyone that she has been
hacked. “The minute my husband sent the message to his family group,
my aunt-in-law had just eWallet’ed R3 500 to the person who she thought was me.
Luckily she was able to reverse it before the money was withdrawn.” She said the person who hacked her WhatsApp account was
sending messages to her contacts, saying she had been arrested and needed money
urgently. “He said I can’t take calls because I was in a holding cell
and even included a police constable’s contact number who was handling my case. “I have helped many people, so some of my contacts sent the
money to the person thinking they were helping me. “When I told them I had been hacked most of them understood
but one person asked me to repay her the money she had sent to the hacker,”
said Hlongwane. She said at some point, she suspected that the hacker might
have called her to assess the situation. “I got a call from a private number
and the man on the line said he received a message that I was in trouble and
needed money. “I told the person not to send the money because I was
hacked, and he asked who I was, then hung up. I only realised later that it
might have actually been the hacker.” She said after that call, the hacker stopped asking people
for money and started sending them codes, like the one she had received before
the ordeal. “I think he’s now looking for more victims to hack because he’s
requesting these WhatsApp codes using other people’s numbers, then pretending
to be me and then asking them to send him the codes to retrieve the account.” She has since reported the matter to the WhatsApp help
centre via e-mail but has not received a response. She also tried opening a
case with the police but was told she could not do so as nothing was stolen
from her and was advised to tell her contacts who had sent the hacker the money
to open cases. She has also managed to regain control of her WhatsApp by
reinstalling it onto her phone again. Hlongwane said the whole ordeal has ruined her reputation
and has left her very discouraged and traumatised. “I’m self-employed so now
I’m just thinking that after all this effort to build my reputation for so
long, here comes this person who was able to come and tarnish everything so
easily, it really did scare me but I will not allow it to break me,” she said. “I prayed about it and am just grateful because I know it
could have been worse, but it wasn’t. I will build my reputation up again,.” Hlongwane warned other WhatsApp users to not resend pins and
codes to other contacts and to always call someone to verify if they are really
in trouble and need money.