One-on-one tutoring, unrivalled sporting facilities and extracurricular
programmes to produce well-rounded children. But that can come at a hefty price. Fees at Midlands’ top schools can set parents back hundreds
of thousands, with the most expensive — Hilton College — costing R321 890 for
this year. Some of the most expensive schools in South Africa are based right
here in the Midlands. A Weekend Witness survey found the Hilton school to be the
most expensive local school, followed by Michaelhouse and St Anne’s Diocesan
School for Girls. Rounding up the list were The Wykeham Collegiate, Treverton
College, St Charles’ College and Epworth School. Fees at some of the schools fluctuated depending on whether
the pupil is a border. Schools also required certain levies for pupil development
and extra murals, as well as hefty enrolment fees, which are non-refundable in
most cases. St Anne’s, for example, charges between R195 and R390 for
music tuition, and its fees information says arrangements can be made for private
coaching in dancing and sports. Analysts agreed that paying extra to ensure your child has
an enriched learning experience would be worth it. “But it still boils down to the child’s own application and
intention. You can’t make the child use the facilities or be successful,” said
child potential expert Nikki Bush. “Learning goes beyond books, and schools which offer a
variety of opportunities for pupils to experience themselves is ideal. Healthy
stimulation in the classroom is important, but the extra murals allows them to
discover who they are.” Bush said upmarket schools allowed pupils to leave school
with more than just a good report card, but rather as a well-rounded person. Dr Mlamuli Hlatshwayo, an education expert, said there was
increasing distrust in public education because of concerns around trade union
influence, teacher competence and the overall quality of learning. He added that the disparity between top schools and those on
the lower-end was an indication of wider inequalities along class and race
lines in South Africa. Hlatshwayo added, however, that the government could try to
turn things around by addressing structural issues like repairing facilities
and limiting the influence trade unions and SGB’s have on schools. Most expensive Midlands schools in 2020: Hilton College: R321 890 Michaelhouse: R303 600 St Anne’s: R230 040 for borders Wykeham: R228 600 for borders Treverton: R223 780 for borders St Charles: R119 489.