I had the grumps with our house last month. And it turned
out it wasn’t even the house’s fault. ‘Twas the week before Christmas and all through the house Something smelled bad, just like a dead mouse. Our house is of an age where she needs some attention now
and then. Last year we got some stuff done on ye grande olde dame. Our pockets
are still feeling the pinch of it. But everything had been done by the end of
the year and, after a good spring clean, we were shipshape. Good thing too,
because we were expecting house guests over the festive season. But, as I
arrived home one day in the preamble to the festivities, on opening the front
door, I became aware of a bit of a whiff. Oh dear, it’s the loo, I thought. We’d had a leaky seal in
the main bathroom toilet which had been redone and this was followed a few
weeks later by a clogged drain which the guy at home very bravely unblocked.
So, when I discovered the whiff, I sniffed around, made my diagnosis and asked
the guy if he could don his DIY hat and patch up the seal again. Luckily he’s
very good that way, so out came the waxy loo-fix stuff and the toilet outlet
pipe was firmly repatched. I scrubbed the loo and bathroom floor and it all
seemed to be taken care of. Except the next day, the smell was there again.
Slightly stronger. Well then, it must be the drains again, I thought, and out
came the drain deodoriser, regular strength. I slopped it down every conceivable drain, plughole and into
the loo, and was convinced its fresh pine fragrance would do the trick. Except
it didn’t. The rank smell had not shifted. I need to confess something. I’m not good with bad smells. I
retch at the slightest odour and even at the thought of the slightest odour. A
rotten potato in the vegetable basket — I’ll make terrible barfing noises. The
smell of the rubbish dump wafting over work when the wind blows in the right
direction — my eyes water with the effort not to heave and embarrass myself in
front of my colleagues. So now, when the smell assaulted my senses again, out
came the big guns — the industrial drain zapper stuff that sizzles and smokes
when you nervously administer it to a drain. The same one with a skull and
crossbones all over the packaging. You have to hold your breath so you don’t
inhale its toxic fumes and beware lest it spills on your hand and eats your
flesh clean away. I followed the directions to a T, running water through the
drain to sluice all the now detached gunk away. As I screwed the cap back on
Satan’s juice, I thought happily, “I’ve nuked it now. All will be well.” Except
it wasn’t. It’s a dead rat in the roof, I thought the next day, holding
my nose and trying not to make gagging noises as the odour intensified. When
the guy got back from work, I coaxed and cajoled him into going up into
no-man’s (or woman’s) land. It’s not a favourite job of his, crawling around in
the dark above the ceiling, but he tackles it with fortitude and a headlamp. He
hauled out the cumbersome long ladder, went up with a bag in his pocket to act
as the rat coffin, had a look around and came down again. “There’s nothing up there,” he said. “There has to be,” I said, my hope of vanquishing the stink
fading. “Nope. Nada,” came the emphatic response. In the meanwhile, the guests had arrived, and add into the
mix a few hot days in the upper thirties, and the pong had matured. I was
getting desperate. I countered it’s attack with expensive air freshener. It
retaliated with a fouler stench. “We’ll have to go up and look again,” I said. “You mean, I’ll have to go up,” he said. I nodded emphatically. “Please look very carefully this
time,” I asked. He rolled his eyes at me, but sportingly went anyway. Again,
he gave the all clear. “I promise you, there’s really nothing up there,” he
said. “But,” I started saying. “No. No buts. There is nothing up there,” he said
enunciating more than he needed to. “You go and look if you don’t believe me.”
I preferred not to. He put away the ladder again. I checked under our shoes in the area around where the smell
was the worst. I stretched up on my little two-step ladder — the highest I’ll
go — and peered into air vents from below. I investigated any marks on the
carpet, on all fours to give them a good sniff. Could it be something under the wooden floor boards? Would
we have to rip them up? It was hard to pinpoint the exact location of the smell.
When I thought it smelled worst in the bathroom, the rank odour shifted to the
passage and then into the storeroom. Then it was in the passage cupboard. It was
everywhere and nowhere. And by now I was dying of embarrassment. It wasn’t very
festive sharing our house with a big stink. I’d lost hope we’d ever find the
source and resigned myself to spending New Year in a fug of nasty smelliness. I
was distressed, and my rather undignified but completely involuntary huxing
noises were, I could tell, annoying everyone. And then! The guy walked into the lounge casually. “I found the
smell,” he said. “What is it?” I cried. “A squashed gecko.” Can you believe it? All of that from a little gecko? The poor thing had been squished between the bathroom door
and the door frame, way above eye level so we never saw its tragic demise and
reeking decomposition. The guy, a hero to all at this point, scraped the corpse
into some loo roll and despatched it down the loo. I flushed again to make sure
it was definitely gone. I swabbed the door frame with disinfectant from top to
bottom and doused the house in room freshener and aired it all out again. I was sad because I love geckos, but wow, my house smells
good.