Black women married before 1988 now have a stake in their
husbands’ assets. This follows a precedent-setting ruling in the Durban high
court on Friday. KZN Deputy Judge President Isaac Madondo has declared all
marriages concluded out of community of property — under a section of the Black
Administration Act (BAA) — to be in community of property. The judgement affects about 400 000 women married under the
Act. Professor Sihawu Ngubane said the judgement is a victory to
women because there was lots of conflict with regards to the estate when a
partner dies. The matter was brought by The Legal Resources Centre (LRC)
on behalf of Agnes Sithole (72), and the Commission for Gender Equality. Only Sithole’s husband, Gideon Sithole, opposed it and not
the minister of Justice and Correctional Services, who was also cited in the
proceedings. Attorney Sharita Samuel, of the centre, said they were
pleased that the court has assisted Sithole and other elderly African women in
the same position. She said this judgement now forms a trilogy with two other
judgements which ensure equal financial protection for black women in marriage. Sithole, of Durban, got married nearly 50 years ago under
the Act. She runs a home-based business selling clothes and her earnings were
used on the family and household expenses. Twenty years ago she and her husband bought a property but
registered it in his name. Over the past two years, the couple’s relationship
deteriorated, allegedly because he had an affair. He then threatened to sell
the property. When Sithole sought legal advice, she found out that her
marriage was concluded under the Act, which means that all the family assets
amassed to the husband’s estate exclusively. Judge Madondo said: “The discrimination against black
persons married before 1988 constitutes an inequality which inhibits the
enjoyment and exercise of the constitutional rights of a large number of black
women in SA.” He said that the section of the Act relevant to this matter
denied thousands of black women protection that is afforded by a marriage in
community of property. That exacerbated their vulnerability and rendered them
entirely dependent on the goodwill of their husbands, who generally control the
bulk of the family’s wealth and assets. Spouses married under the Act, said the judge, are black and
they had been disadvantaged by the racial policies and practices of the past. “No members of a racial group should be made to feel that
they are not deserving of equal concern, respect and consideration and that the
law is likely to be used against them more harshly than others who belong to
other racial groups,” said Judge Madondo. He said the law grants protection and benefit to black
spouses married after 1988, but not spouses married before 1988. “The law must be general in its application in that it must
apply equally to all and not be arbitrary. In other words, the law must apply
impersonally and not to particular people or groups. In essence, the law must
apply uniformly in the whole of SA,” he said. The judge explained the effect of his order, saying that it
should not affect marriages that have been terminated by death or divorce
before the making of the order.