A Pietermaritzburg man is in hospital after he says he was
beaten by an alleged Msunduzi municipal worker in a heated road rage incident. On Wednesday morning, Willem Bezuidenhout (37) says he was
walking to work along Havelock Road when he became embroiled in a physical
altercation with the unknown motorist clad in municipal working gear. Bezuidenhout, who is recuperating in hospital after
suffering skull and facial fractures, told Weekend Witness that the incident
happened at about 6.45 am. He said while he was trying to cross the road, a white
Hyundai came speeding down the road, failing to heed to pedestrians at the
traffic intersection. “The robots were out. I was trying to cross the road when
this vehicle came speeding down. I shouted at the driver and told him the
robots were out and that pedestrians also had the right of way. He didn’t slow
down and he would have run us over,” Bezuidenhout said. He said the “enraged” motorist, who was dressed in municipal
uniform, got out of his vehicle with a wheel spanner and ran up to him. When the motorist approached Bezuidenhout, he claims that an
argument ensued before he was punched and struck on the face with the wheel
spanner. “He jumped out of his car and came charging over and told me I’m a
f**king idiot. Then he started punching me and assaulting me with the wheel
spanner.” The 37-year-old motor mechanic said he was left lying on the
roadway heavily disorientated and bleeding. He said the man was tall, well-built and he was wearing blue
overalls with reflective tape and a municipal badge. Bezuidenhout said he was still in a lot of pain and that he
is due to go for surgery at the Albert Luthuli Hospital in Durban. “I have multiple facial fractures. The swelling has gone
down but I’m still in pain,” he said. After the attack, he said the man drove off. “A crowd had
gathered, and he obviously thought better of it.” Bezuidenhout said he tried to retaliate but only managed to
put his fist through the window of the Hyundai, before the man sped off. He said he had not yet opened a case with police as he was
still in hospital. Ntobeko Ngcobo, Msunduzi acting spokesperson, said they had
not received any reports of the incident. “An internal investigation is being
done on the matter,” Ngcobo said.