Five traffic officials were found guilty of fraud at the Durban Specialised Commercial Crimes Court on Monday. The five are part of a group of 19 people, including learner licence applicants, who were arrested in a raid by the National Anti-Corruption Unit and the Hawks at the uMngeni Licensing Office in Howick, KwaZulu-Natal in 2018. ALSO READ | Licence cheat swoop nets 15 Investigations there had uncovered rampant corruption involving officials issuing fraudulent learner’s licences. The learner licence applicants were given five years suspended sentences in 2019. Another examiner, Skhumbuzo Mkhulise, was found guilty and sentenced to four years imprisonment or a R10 000 fine in February this year. Simon Zwane, Road Traffic Management Corporation’s spokesperson, said on Monday the court found Dumisani Nkala – who is a traffic officer and was a management representative at the time of his arrest - guilty on 49 counts of fraud. Lindiwe Xulu was found guilty on 158 counts of fraud while Meshack Ndlovu (a traffic officer) was found guilty on seven counts, Nkosinathi Zondi was found guilty on 276 counts and Dumisani Phungula was found guilty of fraud. The five are due to appear in court again on February 3, 2021 for sentencing. They are all currently out on bail. The officials were charged with fraud following months of investigations by the National Traffic Anti-Corruption unit which found that examiners were assisting applicants to pass learner licence tests. The examiners would point out the correct answers to the applicants helping them pass without the needed knowledge of the rules of the road. ALSO READ | 80 new drivers blacklisted after licence fraud laid bare in KZN Zwane said all the officials have already been dismissed following disciplinary processes. He said a former manager, Roger Everton, and a senior administration clerk, Wayeeda Mansoor, are still on trial. He also urged members of the public to work with them to eliminate fraud and corruption at the driver licence testing centres by providing information on 0861 400 800. WhatsApp messages can be sent to 083 293 7989 or email ntacu@rtmc.co.za