Comrades Marathon Association (CMA) chairperson Cheryl Winn has been re-elected to the position unopposed as the board welcomes two new members, Les Burnard and Phumlani Ntuli. Winn was re-elected at the CMA’s Annual General Meeting held on Monday and her term of office will come to an end in November next year together with other fellow board members Isaac Ngwenya, Patricia Freeman and Zinhle Sokhela. Mqondisi Ngcobo was also re-elected as the deputy chairperson of the board. The Board election process was overseen by the Independent Electoral Commission. Burnard, current chairperson of Collegians Harriers, and Ntuli, who is involved with Save Orion Athletics Club, replace outgoing board members Adrian Stowell and Linda Hlongwa-Madlala. Winn paid tribute to the two outgoing members. Stowell had served the CMA in various capacities for over two decades, including as a former CMA chairperson between 1997 and 2000. ALSO READ | Comrades Marathon faces tough task after key sponsor pulls out He also served as the chairperson of the CMA Legal and Constitutional Committee during which period he contributed immensely in terms of providing his professional legal expertise. Hlongwa-Madlala served as member of the CMA Board for two years, and for the past year as Chairperson of the Heritage & Traditions Committee. “CMA chairperson Cheryl Winn acknowledged the honesty, integrity, decorum and conviction with which they had represented the Association and thanked both members for their respective services to the Comrades Marathon,” reads a statement from CMA. Other members who were re-elected are Celi Makhoba, Mqondisi Ngcobo and Steve Mkasi. “With the CMA being founded as an Association, the main functions of the Board are ethical leadership, corporate governance, formulation of the strategic plan and policies of the organisation and ensuring the sustainability of The Ultimate Human Race,” the CMA said in the statement. “Importantly, the Board is further tasked with retaining the world-class standards, ethos and traditions that are synonymous with this iconic event. Athletics South Africa president Aleck Skhosana and his KZN Athletics Jay Reddy will sit on the board as representatives of their respective organisations.