KwaZulu-Natal Health MEC Nomagugu Simelane-Zulu has appealed to the
province’s citizens and visitors to celebrate responsibly this festive season. She was speaking during a Christmas Day briefing on Friday afternoon. Simelane-Zulu revealed that the numbers of people diagnosed and dying from
Covid-19 related complications had been on the rise since the onset of the
second wave. "Just two days ago, the country registered 14 000 infections in one
day. More than 4000 of those were from here in KZN. We therefore have a big problem on our hands, and really cannot afford to let
our guard down," she said. Simelane-Zulu said over the past 24 hour reporting period, the province had
registered 4 568 new Covid-19 infections, bringing the KZN's
cumulative number of Covid-19 cases to 171 455. At least 28 people died
from the virus on the day before Christmas, which brought the province's total
number of Covid-19 fatalities to 3 901. "We will remember that two days ago, the number of new infections was
4 188, so clearly, our numbers are not only astronomically high, but they
are increasing. This is extremely concerning, and we are pleading with citizens
to help us curb the spread of Covid-19."The province had 2 918 patients admitted in hospitals, of which 989 were
in public facilities and 1929 in the private sectors'. Of those admitted, 14%
required intensive care services. Of the total number of available operational beds (1 485), 41% were
vacant; while 355 of ICU beds are occupied," said Simelane-Zulu. She reiterated the government's message on avoiding social gathering and
postponing events where possible to curb the spread of the virus. She said a lot of people, especially the youth, are Covid-19 positive, yet they
were asymptomatic, so they might never know. However being asymptomatic did not
mean they were not infectious which made them a serious threat to their own
parents, grandparents, and other elderly relatives. "As we are aware, many elderly people tend to have co-morbidities, which
place them at higher risk of developing complications if they get
infected," said Simelane-Zulu. 