A 20-year-old woman was on Monday sentenced to 20 years’ imprisonment for killing the owner of Steak Den in Copesville because she wanted to steal money to buy food. Nonkululeko Makhathini pleaded guilty in the Pietermaritzburg high court in terms of a plea agreement. She confessed to stabbing Mohammed Hossian on the face, neck and stomach until he stopped struggling. Reading out her plea to the court, attorney Amanda Hulley said that the young woman worked on a casual basis for Hossian when her family needed food. On March 24, she told two of her friends that there was no food at home and that she needed to get food for her family. The trio then walked to the shop. Although the shop was closed, Hos­sian opened the sliding door and allowed Makhathini to enter. The two friends remained outside. READ MORE | Former Msunduzi mayor’s bodyguard shot in front of his children Hulley said Hossian locked the sliding door after she entered. She then sent a message to one of her friends to say that Hossian had locked the door and that she would look for the keys. When she found the keys, Hossian noticed that she had them. “He asked her why she was carrying his keys and she lied that she wanted to go home,” said Hulley. Hossian accused her of lying and pushed her. “She fell on the floor. She saw a knife on the sink and decided to use the knife to stab him,” added Hulley. Makhathini then broke the glass on the sliding door so that she could leave the shop. Hulley said her client then ran to the till and took R1 400. She also stole cellphone vouchers. The neighbours heard the shattering of glass and called police. Makhathini left through the shop window and ran home. She was arrested the next day and immediately confessed and co-operated with police. READ MORE | Life imprisonment for murderous car thief Of her personal circumstances, Hulley said she was 19 years old at the time. She is single and has no children. She only has a Grade 9 level of education and had no money to complete school. Hulley added that Makhathini lived with her 79-year-old grandmother and three siblings. Factors considered in coming to a plea agreement included the potential length and expense of a trial of this nature given the multiplicity of documentation and the volume of evidence which would have to be led. Another would have been the cost of such a trial to the state and the woman. READ MORE | Elderly farmer (80) dies after being shot, robbed and tied to tree on Mooi River farm The nature of the offence, Makhathini’s remorse and the occurrence and prevalence of this type of crime were also considered. Judge Rashid Vahed accepted the plea agreement and sentenced Makhathini accordingly.