Msunduzi’s finance department is gearing up to embark on a city-wide programme to address residents’ billing issues. Chief financial officer Nelisiwe Ngcobo said the teams would be going to different wards to engage residents on their individual billing problems with the aim of resolving them. This, she said, would include updating customers’ details — something which has been an ongoing problem since the City migrated from the Promis to the SAP financial system. This led to some bills sent to the wrong addresses while others were not sent out at all. The Witness previously reported on how the problems with SAP’s billing module had led to some consumers not being billed because the meters were not even on the system, while others disputed the amounts on the statements as they claimed they were overcharged. City administrator Scelo Duma was concerned about the spread of Covid-19 since Ngcobo referred to the programme as izimbizo, but she assured him and the financial services portfolio committee that it would not be a gathering but rather people coming into the chosen venue individually. ALSO READ | Cogta MEC hears residents complaints about Msunduzi municipality’s billing mess vows to step in. In a related project, Ngcobo said they were looking into conducting a three-month indigent registration, customer collection and data collection programme. She said the plan was to employ 195 people — five per ward — to do the work. She said identifying households qualifying for indigent benefits — which is free basic services — would help address the City’s runaway debtors book, which currently hovers over R4 billion. This would help the municipality distinguish between collectable and non-recoverable debt that should be considered for write-off. Marlon Hoskins of the debtors management unit said council sends around 180 000 bills monthly, with around 30 000 being undelivered by the Post Office as the address is either not valid or does not exist. He said the revenue department intended on addressing these challenges by visiting every property to undertake indigent registration, customer verification and data collection. Hoskins proposed that people employed as part of the data collection team get paid R3 500 per month, while five clerks be paid R5 000 for capturing all the information collected. Councillor Mohamed Salim Goga of the Al Jama-ah political party suggested that the municipality use ward assistants for the project.