Dozens of people face a bleak Christmas after they were left homeless when their shacks burned down at Sacca informal settlement, in Mkondeni, Pietermaritzburg on Thursday morning, when a jilted teenage lover allegedly set her boyfriend’s home alight. Many were at work when the fire broke out. The young woman, whose name is known to The Witness, had been living with her boyfriend since they started dating in June. The boyfriend was at work when he received a call that she had allegedly set his home alight and the fire had spread to the neighbouring shacks. At least 30 other shacks are believed to have burned down. “A few months ago she accused me of cheating on her and she cut all my clothes into pieces but I forgave her because I still loved her,” he told The Witness. He said in the recent weeks they had been fighting over a new man she supposedly met and was bragging to him about all the time. He said he asked her to leave him and go stay with the other man but she would not. “I didn’t want to be with someone who was sleeping with someone else. She was bragging about him all the time and how much she loves him so I told her to go. This morning she started with it again and I just packed up her belongings, put them outside and I locked my room before leaving for work.” Witnesses alleged the teen first tried to break the padlock then threw rocks at the door in attempts to get inside. When she did not succeed she poured paraffin on the planks around the walls and set the shack on fire. Many of the residents had already left for work and were unable to save their belongings. The man said he lost his identity documents and new clothes that he recently bought for his eight-year daughter who lives in the Eastern Cape. “My mother also bought clothes for my three siblings and we were going to take them with us when we leave for Christmas next week but I’m not sure we’ll be going now because we don’t even have money and we need identity documents to get new bank cards,” he said.