The operation of the New England Road landfill site in the manner undertaken by Msunduzi Municipality is a “disaster waiting to happen”. In addition, the municipality has violated not just numerous laws and the Constitution, but also international law. So says Jonas Sibanyoni, a part-time commissioner at the South African Human Rights Commission. Environmental authorities have also attempted to implement administrative remedies and criminal sanctions against the municipality but this too has not yielded any positive results. What next? The commission believes that only the court can help now, since everything else has failed. It has filed an urgent application with the Pietermaritzburg high court, which has been set down for next week. It seeks an order declaring that Msunduzi’s mismanagement of the site and breach of its statutory duty unlawfully violated the waste management licence, the national Environmental Management Act, Waste Act, the National Water Act, a section of the Constitution and international law. The application also raises the issue of whether a structural interdict is an appropriate constitutional remedy to rectify the breaches of the municipality’s statutory and constitutional duties in the context of operating and managing the site. Sibanyoni has filed a detailed affidavit of more than 70 pages. The affidavit deals with the background of the application; the commission’s engagement with stakeholders; the environmental authorities’ failed attempts to ensure compliance with applicable laws and the licence; the commission’s locus standi and the municipality’s constitutional duty to protect its citizens. He said that the facts of this matter demonstrate the vulnerability of the municipality’s citizens where it does not act in an exemplary manner with respect to its obligations to comply with the law and the applicable permits. Sibanyoni said that there is a continuing violation of the Constitution by an organ of state. “The violation concerned has spanned a period of more than 10 years. The plight of the municipality’s citizens is continuously in jeopardy. It is only a matter of time before a disaster may occur at the dump. In fact, such a disaster has already happened in the form of the fires.” ALSO READ: Chaos again at landfill site All that is sought from the court on an urgent basis is an order which will regulate the delivery of any opposing affidavit/s and place the municipality to address the matter, he said. The application is also against the head and MEC of the Department of Economic Development, Tourism and Environmental Affairs. Sibanyoni said that when the department found that the municipality had violated the laws, it could not act decisively and swiftly against the municipality. Instead, it had to engage the municipality in accordance with the principles of co-operative governance and intergovernmental relations. ALSO READ: DA: Msunduzi must fix landfill site to stop dumping He said a stakeholder engagement that the commission undertook revealed that the municipality’s operation of the dump has: compromised the health of some of the citizens; negatively affected the livelihoods of some of the citizens; compromised the wellbeing of some of the citizens and negatively affected the environment within the municipality’s area of jurisdiction. He said that there have been several audits compiled on the dump by the department over the years and there are still many non-compliances. Following an audit in March 2015, the department noted an improvement in the management of the dump. But this was only until mid-2017, said Sibanyoni. The municipality had taken active steps to address most of the identified non-compliances. These actions included the removal of waste pickers and recyclers who were living on the premises; improving security and access; installing concrete palisade fencing around the site; revising and establishing stormwater controls; upgrading and repairing the leachate system and undertaking annual external audits. From July 2017, he said the municipality abandoned the steps that it had taken from mid-2015 to mid-2017 to improve the management of the dump. ALSO READ: Smoke engulfing N3 from Pietermaritzburg dumpsite 'should clear soon' - municipality In October 2017, the department and its national counterpart undertook another comprehensive audit of the municipality’s operation of the dump. Sibanyoni added that the municipality’s non-compliances recorded in the report have persisted. “That has had negative consequences for the municipality’s citizens. For instance, as a consequence of the municipality’s failure to ensure that the workface of the dump is adequately covered and compacted, the incidents of fire have occurred with frequency after October 25, 2017,” said Sibanyoni. The report also recorded that the municipality failed to comply with a substantial number of conditions of the licence. The following non-compliances were also recorded in the audit report: “According to the facility all stormwater from the site flows directly to the Blackburowspruit, which can indicate that contaminated stormwater could flow into the river.” 