Hailed as the “Fantastic Five” in the Woodlands community, Randall Adams (aka Mafutha), Justin Roberts, Llewellyn Gender, Keith Abrahams (aka Kiddo) and Garth Rampaul, along with many other volunteers, have made it their mission to uplift the lives of the residents in the area. The group has worked tirelessly through the times of struggle the local community has been faced with this year to see to it that local service delivery issues are dealt with. They see to it that burst water pipes are repaired; electricity issues are addressed; ensure the municipality is “being hounded to resolve its shortfalls”; that fibre technicians are taken to task to rehabilitate the areas they dug up; that people in the community are being assisted in any way they can; that artisans and tradesmen get an opportunity to work again — the list goes on. Speaking on behalf of the “Fantastic Five”, Mafutha said that they got tired of begging for assistance from the municipality and from others outside of their community and took it upon themselves to help wherever they could. “Sitting back and waiting for the designated people to come sort out our issues became futile, especially during these fibre installations that have left so many of our residents without water and lights these past few days that we had to come up with a plan,” “Each of us have special skills which we bring to the forefront of our mission, for example I am a qualified plumber and even went as far as helping people out in Northdale,” said Mafutha. He added that they have embarked on various projects, such as restoring electricity to homes, feeding those who are unable to afford a meal, fixing potholes and restoring the community to its once former glory among other things. Mafutha says that ever since they embarked on this self-help initiative in the community the response has been incredible with various sponsors, volunteers and the mayor and deputy mayor coming on board to assist in their efforts. One of the big social projects that has been headed up by Kiddo and Gender as part of the Woodlands Sports Development Association is the revival of the sporting facilities within the community. Mafutha says that for years these facilities were neglected by the municipality. A few years ago, a similar initiative was spearheaded by Bevan Jordan and Gavin Hoskins to restore the various sporting facilities within Woodlands to their former glory, and that project is now gaining more momentum. Jordan and Hoskins are still helping with it. “These initiatives are purely to revive the community. “The youth are being massively disadvantaged by the way the facilities were left to rot. “We want to keep our youth away from drugs and know that the best way to do so is through sport,” said Mafutha. Mafutha acknowledged that the community has its fair share of challenges and that if the people do not tend to these challenges then no one else would. “It is up to us. We need to foster unity in our community because if we do not come together no progress will be made. “Back in the day we all helped one another without thought of any gain, we simply did it to be good people in the community and this is what we are trying to bring back by helping where help is needed,” said Mafutha.