Maritzburg United’s overall mood has improved after their losing streak ended via a comeback draw against table-topping Mamelodi Sundowns at Harry Gwala Stadium last weekendInjured first-choice goalkeeper, Sebastian Mwange is on the mend while midfielder Mxolisi Kunene is set to miss far more matches than initially fearedTeam of Choice’s next league encounter is against Premiership newcomers Moroka Swallows in Soweto next Tuesday Maritzburg United have experienced mixed fortunes on the injury front, but their overall mood has improved as a result of their losing streak ending via last weekend’s comeback draw against table-topping Mamelodi Sundowns at Harry Gwala Stadium. The positive news from the local club on the manpower front is that their first-choice goalkeeper, Sebastian Mwange, should be back to fitness soon, but midfielder Mxolisi Kunene is going to miss far more matches than initially feared. Mwange, who was signed for the new DStv Premiership season from Green Eagles in Zambia, suffered pain in his knee during the second half of Saturday’s 1-1 affair against the Brazilians and had to be replaced with Jethren Barr. He has since been checked by medical staff and undergone rehabilitation, with the result that he will be ready to travel with the team for their league encounter with Premiership newcomers Moroka Swallows in Soweto next Tuesday, according to the Team of Choice on Tuesday. READ MORE | A ‘winning’ draw for United against Sundowns Kunene is in a worse situation, though. After he damaged his knee during the PSL’s bio-bubble in Gauteng last season, which was made worse by United being unable to win a match in that period, the early word from United was that he would miss only a few games of the new season. READ MORE | Can Middendorp make the Team of Choice win again? That was later changed to January next year, and the very latest return date for him is March. This means he may only feature in the last-third of the season under new United coach Ernst Middendorp. In the meantime, Middendorp continues to spread his personal football gospel to the United clan on the training field. This is reportedly being done in a lighter spirit this week compared to last week because of what Middendorp described as a “winning point” against Sundowns. Said the club’s managing director and chairperson Farook Kadodia on Tuesday: “The result against Sundowns has given us renewed hope, after all those losses we suffered. “The guys really did well on Saturday. “In the game before that, we experienced some bad decisions by the match officials, but we have had to forget about that and carry on. On the whole the mood in our camp is much better this week, thankfully.” READ MORE | Hlubi back for Maritzburg United Meanwhile, a lone midweek fixture sees Chiefs host Leopards in the Premiership on Wednesday at 7.30 pm. Amakhosi reportedly have Dumsani Zuma and Kearyn Baccus as likely absentees through injury.