If you flout Covid-19 regulations you can expect harsh penalties in Kwa­Zulu-Natal. Premier Sihle Zikalala said the province was adopting a zero-tolerance policy for offenders during the festive season. Speaking at the launch of Operation Vala in Durban yesterday, Zikalala said there would be no major events in the province during the December holidays. “We are appealing to our people to host themselves as families and as relatives in their own space and homes,” he added. “We will want [those who are visiting cities] to enjoy themselves along the coast and the inland but without being crowded when they [do so]. We are going to ensure that we are strict on measures that protect people against Covid-19.” Zikalala said the abuse of alcohol and drinking and driving would not be tolerated. Roadblocks will be intensified, strengthened and increased on all roads during this festive season and picnics will be monitored. He appealed to municipalities in KZN to enforce by-laws and regulations, saying: “People must not be allowed to drink all over. We are proposing that there be only 100 people allowed in indoor events and we will want to curtail mass gatherings.” Officials will also be monitoring beaches in eThekwini, KwaDukuza, Richards Bay, towards uMkhuze, and in the areas south of Durban. Access will be subjected to restrictions in terms of entry and exit. “[The] strong message is going to be communicated to raise awareness among our people,” Zikalala said. “There is a dark cloud over the sky. Our message is clear: protect yourself against Covid-19 and ensure the safety of yourself and your loved ones.” The Vala Campaign also aims to address taxi violence, road traffic accidents, gender-based violence, drug peddling and abuse, farm murders, and crime in tourism spots. eThekwini Metro Municipality Mayor Mxolisi Kaunda said the city had made arrangements to curb the spread of the virus at its beaches. They include a free park-and-ride shuttle service to prevent congestion along the beach roads and other spots around the city. “There will [also] be a constant cleaning and deep sanitisation of ablution facilities,” Kaunda said. — WWR.