The Beer Association of South Africa (Basa) acknowledges the
severity of the Covid-19 second wave and, with it, the immense pressure on the
healthcare system. Given the surge in infections, Basa said it understands the
need for urgent interventions to stabilise the healthcare system. ALSO READ | JUST IN | Alcohol ban reinstated as SA moves to level 3 lockdown In a statement issued on Monday night, a few moments after the
president’s address, Basa said they do not, however, agree with the blanket
alcohol ban announced by the president. “Firstly, the previous two alcohol bans had a devastating
impact on the beer industry, with 7 400 job losses, R14.2 billion in lost sales
revenue and 30% of breweries being forced to shut their doors. In addition, the
government lost R7.4 billion in taxes and excise duties that could have been
used in the fight against Covid-19. This third ban will do untold economic
damage to the beer sector and the 415 000 livelihoods it supports. “Secondly, we are concerned that another ban will further
entrench the web of illicit alcohol trade as consumers look for ways around the
ban. Already, before Covid-19, the World Health Organisation had estimated that
a quarter (24%) of all alcohol consumed in South Africa was sold illicitly. The
rise in the illicit manufacture, trade and consumption of alcohol caused by
prohibition poses serious health risks as health and safety standards are
bypassed. Methanol poisoning can cause blindness, liver damage and even death.
An increase in illicit trade also means that the taxes and duties that usually
accrue from the legitimate sale of alcohol are lost to the fiscus,” said Basa
in their statement. ALSO READ | Liquor group suggests off-premises sales as SA braces for tightened restrictions Instead of a blanket ban, Basa said the government needs to
regulate sensibly and to ensure that those regulations are adhered to. “There is much that the industry and government can do to
encourage moderate, responsible consumption and to penalise those who break the
rules. “For our part, to ensure businesses are Covid-19 compliant,
BASA members have provided training and guidelines to outlets across the
country, including the roll-out of 50 000 educational posters to
establishments. We have adopted a zero-tolerance approach to non-compliant
businesses by cutting off supply to any outlets and establishments that have
been found guilty of flouting Covid-19 directives.” To reduce crowding, Basa said its members have partnered
with other role players to launch a number of ‘click-and-collect’ platforms
that allow customers to place their orders online or via SMS and pick up their
purchases at designated times. They have also promoted a toll-free hotline
(0800 014 856) which citizens can call to report incidents of criminality
linked to the sale and consumption of alcohol. ALSO READ | SA mulls reinstating alcohol ban as virus cases surge “Basa believes that a third alcohol ban will do more harm
than good. We will therefore continue to engage with government on what needs
to be done to save lives and livelihoods as we work together to beat Covid-19.”