The DA’s motion for Msunduzi council to dissolve itself with immediate effect, to save the “dysfunctional” municipality from collapse, was met with a counter from the ruling party. The ANC called for the entire DA caucus to resign but later “temporarily” withdrew the motion this week. The opposition party’s whip, councillor Shaun Adkins, submitted the DA’s urgent motion for the dissolution of council to Speaker Eunice Majola-Zondi earlier this month, asking for it to be discussed at the next meeting. That did not happen when the council met on Tuesday. Majola said council could not entertain the motion as it would have been in contravention of the Municipal Structures Act, adding that this week’s meeting was an ordinary one with other items on the agenda. She said the relevant provision of the act says “a municipal council may dissolve itself at a meeting called specifically for this purpose”. The ACDP’s Rienus Niemand agreed, saying: “I agree with you that a special meeting must be called to discuss this matter.” Administrator Scelo Duma said a speaker could not just voluntarily call a meeting, adding that such a gathering must be requested as part of the motion of the proposer. In his motion, Adkins said Msunduzi had been allowed to fall into a state of dysfunctionality by the current ANC-controlled council. “The council’s maladministration of the municipality is no better illustrated than by its gross and proven negligence,” he added. Adkins said some of the areas where this was evident included financial mismanagement, collapsing infrastructure and poor waste collection and disposal. He also alleged a high incidence of theft, fraud and corruption amongst staff, coupled with a lack of consequence management. Other problems included factional battles among the ANC councillors “to the detriment of residents and ratepayers” and the fact that the municipality was unable to institute and manage a billing system. The SAP system was, he said, a disaster. Msunduzi has also failed to provide housing to its residents “especially in municipal wards where vast swathes of vacant municipal land lie dormant, such as Woodland (Mulberry Road forest) and abandoned housing projects at Site 11 and Yellow Wood areas,” Adkins said. He added that the City failed to implement and monitor a meterage system for water and electricity in a fair and consistent manner, saddling ratepayers “with exorbitant utility accounts whilst certain areas benefit from free access to services”. The challenges faced by Msunduzi, said Adkins, were what led to it being placed under administration, but that this had proven to be inadequate as the appointed administrator, Duma, only fulfils an advisory function. The DA wants an administrator who will have complete control to run the municipality without the council’s presence. “The ANC’s majority to ignore and defeat the DA’s warnings in council has resulted in Msunduzi sinking ever more deeply into the morass of financial delinquency and administrative dysfunctionality,” said Adkins. The meeting was also supposed to discuss a counter motion from ANC’s Siphamandla Khumalo, who called for all the DA councillors to resign from the Msunduzi council, but he “temporarily” withdrew it. He accused the DA of having no political will to turn the City around and deliver quality services to the people. “They are not a solution to the challenges facing our people that is why if there are challenges they quickly call for dissolution of the council,” said Khumalo. Niemand tried to get the matter to be discussed further, saying it made no sense. “Frankly Madam Speaker all you need to do is to look at the history of the ANC in this City …,” he started before he was cut off by ANC councillors and Duma. Duma said council could not debate a motion that had not been moved and seconded.