A lion roars, a dog barks, and an elephant
trumpets. But what noise does a giraffe make? While many people may be perplexed at this question,
because they’ve never heard a giraffe make a distinguishable vocal noise from its
long neck, a research paper revealed that giraffes
do in fact make sounds to each other at night. And,
the scientists who studied the communication of these graceful African mammals,
believe the sounds they make, may “have the potential to function as
communicative signals to convey information about the physical and motivational
attributes of the caller”. The study,
by scientists at the University of Vienna, cautioned however that this requires further
investigations in future studies. The study said giraffes are known to produce sounds, but there is no
evidence that they use vocalizations for communication. It is widely assumed that giraffes can produce sounds inaudible to
humans, similar to elephants. The team collected almost 1000 hours of
recordings of giraffe at three European zoos, and on analysing it, they found
something besides the “known burst, snorts and grunts”. “We detected harmonic, sustained and frequency-modulated ‘humming’
vocalisations during night recordings. “Important vocalisation types
include long-distance contact calls that convey individual identity as well as
vocalisations to confirm and strengthen social bonding when reunited after
temporary separation. “Although giraffes do have a well-developed larynx and laryngeal nerves,
it was long suggested that due to the long neck, giraffes might have problems
to produce an air-flow of sufficient velocity to induce self-sustained vocal
fold vibrations. “Notwithstanding, giraffes are, in principle, capable of producing
sounds. On YouTube there is a video of a newborn calf at a zoo emitting loud
bellows while being restrained by keepers to examine its health state. Giraffes
do not seem to use vocalizations regularly, but they have further been
(anecdotally) described to, ‘bleat’, ‘brrr’, ‘burst, ‘cough, ‘growl’, ‘grunt’, ‘low’
‘moan’, ‘moo, ‘sneeze’, ‘snore’ or ‘snort’,” said the scientists in a report on the study. But the study had its challenges. “As expected, exploring giraffe vocal communication turned out to be
time consuming, tedious and very challenging.” But they present data indicating that giraffes do produce “structurally
interesting humming vocalisations apart from the short broadband snorts, bursts
and grunting sounds. These hums, however, are apparently mainly produced at
night.” And, they say, these humming vocalisations might be of communicative
relevance. The scientists recorded 65 humming vocalisations: 34 hums at Berlin
Tierpark, 9 hums at Vienna Zoo, and 22 hums at Copenhagen Zoo. They described the hums as being “rich in harmonic structure, having a
deep and sustained sound” and of varying duration. “Although we could not identify the calling individuals, the giraffes
definitely produced the recorded sounds because we documented similar
vocalizations in three different institutions without any additional co-housing
species. “At Copenhagen Zoo, hums occurred approximately within two hours
before sunrise, while at the other two zoos, hums occurred mainly in the middle
of the night. These patterns might provide suggestive hints that in giraffe
communication the ‘hum’ might function as a contact call, for example, to
re-establish contact with herd mates. “Nonetheless, the rich harmonic structure and the frequency modulation
indicate that this type of vocalization has the potential to convey relevant
information to receivers. “Interestingly, these vocalisations have so far been recorded only at
night. Even giraffe keepers and zoo managers stated that they have never heard
these vocalisations before.” They said anatomical investigations indicate that giraffes have
excellent vision with potentially long-range visual acuity, which would provide
a means of communication between widely separated giraffe. “Recent social behaviour research has shown that giraffes spend a
significant portion of their vigilance towards social partners, suggesting that
perception and utilisation of visual communication cues are highly developed in
the giraffe communication system. Giraffes might use vocalisations more often
once vision is limited (e.g. at night time). Future studies should test in a
well-established experimental setting whether giraffes are more vocal when
visual communication cues are absent.” 