In a year that has presented more unexpected changes and challenges than we could ever have imagined, it’s no surprise that the catch phrases for this year were completely unique. When we all toasted in the New Year back in January, few of us had any inkling of what was coming our way as the Covid-19 pandemic hit and then took hold. With this in mind, The Witness asked their Facebook readers what they thought the catch-phrase for 2020 is. Their responses covered a range of topics related to the pandemic, from phrases used by President Cyril Ramaphosa to those we all heard repeatedly on virtual meetings. While some of them are sobering, trust us as South Africans to stamp our unique sense of humour on many of them. We hope the witty ones will make you smile as much as we did when reading them. Here are some of their answers: Cherzellê Fiona Govender – “When people zol…" Darryn Wright Rodwell - #withimmediateeffect Mika Aheer - "Sorry, I was looking for the unmute button."  #virtualmeetings Casey Van Der Merwe - Spray your hands Shazia Hoosen – “My fellow South Africans” Joanne Wirth - Pull it up! Vic Naidoo - Nandos said it. Best "tsek 2020' Carmen Van der Merwe -  Lockdown Alta Green - Please Sanitize Sulaiman Gangat - Never believe mainstream media Hannah Weymouth - "This whole COVID thing" Brian Brown -  If this year was food. It would look like tripe! Keshnie Solai -  Eat dhall with a fork Shan Zwart - Anyone got smokes??? Nataly Jo-Anne Ireland - Are you sick Evasen Reddy - Can you see my screen?! Beatrice KamaVidima Mpangase - Immediate effect Kerry McKay - Because 2020 Yolanda de Lange - I thank you.... Yasmin Ontong - Be safe Miyash Rampersadh - When people Zol.. And in response: Junior Gounden - they put saliva Miyash Rampersadh -  on the Payperrr Kerry McKay - What the 2020 Nitha Doodla - Stay at home Reante - Park by the pozie Garth Lancaster – You’re on mute Noelene Campbell Cannon -  Damn I forgot my mask in the car/at home! Anne Wroots Gouws - May God bless Africa and her people Enki Enki -  Watch out !!! Pothole... Eish Felicia Clarke - Remember when.... Sphesihle Blessing Khanyile - This could be the last Christmas for many Tracey van Nieuwenhuizen -  As a pre school teacher. "Keep your hula hoop on". "No touching". Nicola Brandon DeWet - The new normal Andre Duvenage - All the funds and billions borrowed were used appropriately, but we need more. Laveshni Naidoo - Family meeting Alisha Meyer - It's not my problem Elaine Govender - Socially distant Michelle Du Plessis -  With immediate effect What was your favourite catchphrase for 2020? post in the comments section below.  