More than four million people in South Africa could be provided with three meals a day for a year if the country reduces just one tenth of the food that goes to waste annually. According to the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organisation, an estimated 1,4 billion tons of edible food ends up in landfill or is incinerated around the world. This is unacceptable, says Riina Kionka, the European Ambassador to SA, especially when you consider that 820 million people (11% of the world’s population) are food insecure. In South Africa, it is thought that around 12 million tons of food goes to waste due to weaknesses in the food value chain. Andy du Plessis, managing director of FoodForward SA, a charity which works to combat hunger, says that while we produce enough food to feed all our people, food poverty at the household level continues to rise. Citing the WWF Surplus Food Report 2018, he said approximately 50% of food loss takes place during harvesting, with processing, packaging, distribution and retail accounting for a further 45% of wasted food. The remaining 5% of food waste is the responsibility of consumers. The irony is that most of this food is still fit for human consumption. ALSO READ | Basic foods basket costs R161 more “It’s important to clarify what we mean by surplus food, because there are huge misconceptions, misunderstandings, and even misapprehension around this issue,” says Du Plessis. “Surplus food is not expired food, lower grade food, or rotten food. It is perfectly good food. If timeously intercepted, surplus food can be diverted to address the growing problem of hunger and food poverty across South Africa.” Understanding what food labels mean is one way that consumers can help reduce waste. Karin Carstensen, scientific and regulatory affairs manager for Woolworths, says there is an important difference between a sell-by date and best-before and use-by dates.  “The best-before date is about eating quality,” she explains. “You find it on products such as chocolates and biscuits, and, the important thing for consumers to understand, is that best-before dates indicate the quality of the products and that beyond the best-before dates, products may still be donated or sold to charities, etc. “The other date is the use-by date. It is important because it is used on products that may potentially become unsafe, like ready meals and sushi.” To reduce waste Woolworths has encouraged its stores to develop relationships with charities in their area so that foods that have been removed from the shelves because they have reached their sell-by dates can be donated to those in need. Among the beneficiaries is the Angels’ Care Centre in Howick, which receives surplus food from the store at the Falls Centre. Chefs in South Africa are also making use of surplus food to provide food for those in need. Arnold Tanzer, co-founder of Chefs With Compassion, said that when the country went into Covid-19 lockdown in March, hoteliers and restaurant owners were left with large amounts of perishable food in their fridges and freezers. READ | KZN help for Limpopo farmers Fresh fruit and vegetables was also collected from the fresh food market in Gauteng, which had piles of unsold stock. “Rather than letting it go to waste we collected it, distributed it and made 1,4 million meals,” Tanzer said, adding that they had been supported by industrial-scale suppliers who donated dry and tinned goods to the cause. Small-scale farmers, meanwhile, believe they provide a cheaper and more sustainable alternative to commercial retailers. Siphiwe Sithole, owner of African Marmalade, says she is able to reduce food waste because her farm in Hekpoort, near Krugersdorp, is based within the community she supplies fruit and vegetables to. “We are able to sell what would normally not be retail-suitable to the local community,” she adds. “Small scale farmers also harvest on demand ... people come to the farm and to the farm stall and buy, so we are not relying on the cold chain system where stuff has been harvested and is stuck in coldrooms for weeks on end before it gets to the consumer.” All the crops planted on her farm — including cassava, indigenous pumpkin, watermelon, beans, yams, non-genetically modified maize and yellow maize for poultry farms — are native to the African continent. They are grown without chemicals, using traditional methods, ensuring that the food remains nutrient-dense.  Sithole believes the key to taking African food into the mainstream starts by ensuring there is a supply of seeds. “It has become fashionable to just buy seedlings or seeds in a packet, eat the produce and buy to plant again,” she says, “[but] it is important to grow your food from heirloom and non-chemically treated seeds ... save some and ensure we can preserve food diversity, as well as retain food sovereignty.” ALSO READ | Angels keeping hunger at bay For food writer Anna Trapido, a key element to reduce food waste is to address the issue of land and, in particular, the problems caused by forced removals and the creation of townships during apartheid. It is, she explains, tough for people to be waste-wise and to cook healthy meals when they are forced to spend two hours of every day commuting to and from work. “The amount of time you have at the end of the day to do the kind of long, slow cooking which facilitates waste-wise food is much less. “We have to look at where we came from, our history of land policies and how it impacts on who has it [land] and how it is used,” Trapido adds. Initiative to end food waste Meanwhile, food manufacturers, suppliers and retailers have committed to a landmark initiative to reduce food waste for the benefit of hungry South Africans. The agreement will ensure that surplus food that is still safe for human consumption can be donated to needy families in South Africa. It will also help food manufacturers and retailers to achieve the United Nations’ sustainable development goal to halve food waste by 2030. Launched by the Consumer Goods Council of South Africa (CGCSA), the food loss and waste voluntary agreement is being supported by the national departments of Trade, Industry and Competition, and Environment, Forestry and Fisheries, and has funding from the SA-European Union Dialogue Facility. Current estimates show that about 30% of local agricultural production in South Africa is wasted each year. This is equivalent to an estimated R60 billion a year or about two percent of GDP. In a country where an estimated 14 million people go to bed hungry every night, this is a monumental unnecessary waste that cannot be allowed to continue, said Matlou Setati, spokesperson for the food safety initiative.  Gareth Ackerman, co-chairperson of CGCSA, added: “By developing the voluntary food loss and waste agreement, CGCSA is making a bold call to South African food manufacturers, distributors and retailers, to commit themselves to prevent and reduce food waste. “Given that South Africa’s retailers sell approximately 80% of the food consumed in the country, they sit at a critical point in the value chain to influence changes to reduce some of the food waste South Africa generates each year. I am glad to say we have received overwhelming support from our members, among them Massmart, Danone, Tiger Brands, Pick n Pay, Woolworths and Shoprite, who have already pledged to support this important initiative. “Many more members are signing up because they believe it is the right thing to do.” Ackerman said it is not only morally wrong but also heart-breaking that millions of tons of food are thrown away, yet the food is perfectly safe for human consumption. “Ultimately, the CGCSA is advocating for legislation to make it possible for surplus food, which is still safe for human consumption, is donated to the needy as part of national goals to avert food insecurity in South Africa,” he added. Minister of Environment, Forestry and Fisheries Barbara Creecy welcomed the initiative and its potential to ensure more sustainable consumption patterns in the country. “More responsible consumption of agricultural produce will assist to promote both food security and more sustainable agricultural practice. All efforts to divert this waste through ensuring better use of food products is a significant contribution to our efforts to promote resource efficiency.   