Mayor Mzimkhulu Thebolla has appealed to Msunduzi residents and visitors to act responsibly as they celebrate crossing over into the new year. In his message to Pietermaritzburg’s residents, Thebolla reflected on 2020 saying it had been eventful and disruptive with the Covid-19 virus invading everyone’s lives. He said the world had to abruptly adjust to a new normal. “It is the year where we have also lost a lot and we have been left to pick up the pieces. Thousands of people lost their lives, some lost their loved ones, while others lost their jobs and most businesses have had to shut down,” said Thebolla. He said while celebrating the end of the disruptive 2020, Msunduzi citizens were urged to exercise caution in their celebrations and ensure that they fully adhered to the new, adjusted lockdown level three regulations. “While we understand that this is habitually a time for celebrations, it is unfortunate that for us it is the time to sacrifice many aspects of our New Year’s plans for preservation of our lives and the lives of our loved ones. This is the sacrifice that we are called to make now to prevent the rapid spread of the virus,” he said. Commenting on Msunduzi once again being a Covid-19 hotspot in the second wave, Thebolla said he was alarmed but not surprised by this week’s confirmation. “The behaviour of most of the citizens has been pretty worrisome, with no masks, no sanitising and zero social distancing, despite our calls for people to observe Covid-19 protocols at all times,” he said. Thebolla said Pietermaritzburg people by nature were very proactive when they were called upon to take action for a cause. “We are confident that they will accept the cabinet’s call to endure further sacrifice for the wellbeing of our nation.” In all that devastation, he said it was encouraging to see millions of South Africans who remain committed to the fight against the catastrophic pandemic. He said everyone was even more grateful to hundreds of frontline workers who continued to lead the battle against coronavirus. “We shall continue to keep them in our everyday prayers.” Despite the turbulence of 2020, Thebolla said, people should remain optimistic about the prospects for the new year. “We shall continue to work together to fight poverty, unemployment and inequality for the betterment of the lives of the people of the ‘City of Choice’. “Msunduzi Municipality will continue to work around the clock to roll out effective services delivery programmes and infrastructure development and repairs in its efforts to revitalise our city to a place ... people can proudly call home again,” he said. Thebolla also appealed to everyone to play their part by keeping the city clean and reporting illegal dumping as well as the theft of municipal electricity and water while continuing to pay for their municipal services.