Arthur Zwane, the senior ANC member in Newcastle who had been accused of shooting a security guard who had asked him to sanitise, is still languishing in prison two weeks after his arrest. Zwane’s lawyers had been pushing hard for him to be released on bail but the courts could not process his bail application due to, amongst other things, the ongoing power outages within the Newcastle area. A former ANC eMalahleni regional chairperson, Zwane, alongside two other people, is facing attempted murder charges after the shooting incident at a hardware in Osizweni, Newcastle, two weeks ago. ALSO READ | ANC big shot accused of shooting security guard after hand sanitiser row Zwane, who is also a former ANC KwaZulu-Natal provincial executive committee (PEC) member, has had brushes with the law before. In November last year, Zwane, who remains influential within the ANC in the eMalahleni region, made headlines after storming into an ANC provincial working committee (PWC) meeting at the party’s Durban provincial headquarters. The former ANC eMalahleni regional chairperson then pointed a firearm at Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs (COGTA) MEC, Sipho Hlomuka, who was one of the people attending the PWC meeting. In January the Durban Magistrate court released Zwane on R1000 bail after he had handed himself to the Durban police on learning that Hlomuka had laid charges against him. ALSO READ | Newcastle ANC big shot hand sanitiser shooting case - new twist KwaZulu-Natal police said the latest shooting incident involving Zwane happened after he had been embroiled in a dispute with the security guard over the latter’s request that the former ANC regional chairperson should sanitise before entering the business premises. Zwane and the two men then allegedly fought with the security guard, who used a pick handle to fight off the three. The National Prosecuting Authority (NPA) on Monday confirmed that Zwane had been in custody since his arrest two weeks ago. “The matter was remanded to December 9 (Wednesday) for bail application,” NPA provincial spokesperson,” Natasha Ramkisson-Kara, said. Shortly after the firearm incident involving Hlomuka, the ANC in the province initiated an internal investigation against Zwane. However, ruling party bosses later discontinued the probe. ALSO READ | ANC heavyweight Arthur Zwane still behind bars for sanitiser shooting case “It was felt that it would be pointless to conduct an internal investigation given that there was already a criminal investigation underway,” ANC provincial spokesperson, Nhlakanipho Ntombela, said.