Covid-19 has robbed South Africa’s theatre industry of one of its “greatest warriors, champions and stalwarts”. That’s the view of Ismail Mahomed, director of the Centre for Creative Arts, at the University of KwaZulu-Natal’s Howard College campus in Durban, in a tribute to Dawn Lindberg, who died on Monday evening from a Covid-related illness. She was 75. Born in Durban, Dawn matriculated at Parktown Girls’ High School and studied for a Bachelor’s Degree in Fine Arts at Wits Unversity. In 1962 she met Des. The couple married in 1965 and then toured SA and the then Rhodesia with their show, Folk on Trek. Among their most famous songs were a cover of Woody Guthrie’s This Land Is Your Land and The Seagull’s Name Was Nelson. In 1973 the Lindbergs opened the racially mixed musical Godspell in Maseru, Lesotho. When the couple brought it to the Wits University Great Hall, however, it was immediately banned, ostensibly on the grounds of “blasphemy”. The Lindbergs challenged the banning in the Supreme Court, winning the case. Godspell went on to tour SA for two years. Des and Dawn also staged The Black Mikado at the Diepkloof Hall in Soweto in late May 1976, just before the June 16 student uprising. The show starred Thandi Klaasen, Patrick Ndlovu and Sipho Gumede, among others. Dawn also performed in and produced Eve Ensler’s The Vagina Monologues, staged at the State Theatre in Pretoria in 2003. At the time, she said of the furore the show caused: “Yes, it has been highly controversial. The word vagina is used 136 times and there are 16 orgasms. But it is uplifting and very moving.” Her other major contribution was the annual Naledi Theatre Awards, which Dawn started as a way to recognise and reward excellence in the performing arts. One of those recognised was Steven Stead, artistic director of Durban’s award-winning KickStArt Theatre Company, who won best director of a musical for Sweeney Toddin 2016, and was nominated for Into the Woods, Red, Cabaret and Shrek. “[Dawn] was a formidable force in our industry ... She was passionate about theatre and supported all of us involved in it. “Her championing and stewardship of the Naledi Awards was vital to the theatre, in raising the profile of our industry in a country where the performing arts is hugely undervalued, and in creating national recognition for one another among our peers. “We will miss this charismatic dynamo in many ways as we emerge blinking from the wreckage at the end of this devastating pandemic.” Menzi Mkhwane, who won the Brett Goldin Award for best newcomer/breakthrough for A Voice I Cannot Silence, said he was inspired by the work that Dawn did in the theatre fraternity. Veteran actor and friend of the Lindbergs, Richard Loring, said words couldn’t adequately pay tribute to the remarkable woman he knew and worked with for over 50 years. Dawn Lindberg is survived by her husband, Des, children, Adam and Josh, daughter-in-law Zuraida, and grandchildren, Zaria and Shia.