KwaZulu-Natal Health MEC Nomagugu Simelane-Zulu says the resurgence of Covid–19 means the time is over for affectionate and physically close relations between young people and their parents and grand-parents. “Our New Normal means we literally need to change our old habits, and assimilate into the new world in which we find ourselves. We need to think hard, internalise, and act out a few new things that will ultimately prove important if we are to prevail against this virus,” said MEC Simelane-Zulu in a statement on Thursday. Simelane was speaking in the wake of confirmation by Health Minister Dr Zweli Mkhize that the country has, indeed, been hit by a second wave of Covid-19 infections. "KwaZulu-Natal is among four provinces that have emerged as super-spreaders of the virus. And young people between the ages of 15 and 19 have been found to account for a large proportion of the infections, due to their mobility, and propensity for being part of large gatherings," said Simelane-Zulu. Over the past 24-hour reporting period, KwaZulu-Natal has had 1 576 new COVID infections, which bring the province’s cumulative number of cases to 134 18, she said on Thursday. "At least 10 985 of these cases are still active. The province has now recorded an additional 10 new deaths, bringing the total number of fatalities to 3 423. No fewer than 119 776 people have recovered. "The problem is that, quite commonly, these young people may be Covid–19 positive but asymptomatic. So, they won’t even know that they are walking around with the virus. But this does not stop them from passing it on to their parents and elderly people in their midst. Therefore, there is a dire need for all young people in general to reconfigure how they interact with the elderly – and vice versa. Elderly people have a role to play to keep the youth within the social distancing norms. “The time to be close and cosy with one another is over. And there’s really no reason why we shouldn’t be wearing masks at home, if we’re going out, interacting with other people, and coming back to share our space with family. “We need to do everything humanly possible to avoid acquiring or spreading this virus, if we are to avoid a complete disaster due to this second wave.” The MEC pleaded with all citizens to avoid large gatherings, wear their masks as frequently as possible, and keep a distance of at least two metres between themselves and other people.