The N3 Toll Concession (N3TC) recommends that all travellers carefully plan and prepare for their road trips on the N3 Toll Route this summer, and to stay informed of travel conditions at all times. N3TC manages 415 kilometres of N3 Toll Route between Heidelberg in Gauteng and Cedara in KwaZulu-Natal. Thania Dhoogra, N3TC’s operations manager, said many South African businesses are operating later into December to recover lost time and revenue as a result of the earlier hard lockdown, and schools and universities are also closing and re-opening later. ALSO READ | Gear up for roadworks rage on the N3 to Durban She said because of this, the traditional summer holiday peak season is expected to be very different from previous years. Dhoogra said that the N3TC has carefully prepared for every foreseen eventuality. “We are ready to welcome an influx of holidaymakers to the N3,” said Dhoogra. She said earlier this year, the national level 1 lockdown resulted in a break in the N3 Toll Route’s road maintenance and rehabilitation programme. The N3TC’s contractors have pulled out all stops to make up for the lost time, and are ready to cease all road works, accept essential maintenance work, on Friday, December 18.  “Some of the above sections will remain subject to temporary speed restrictions, and for safety reasons, may continue to be partially barricaded due to incomplete construction. The good news, however, is that at least two lanes will be open to traffic in each direction along the entire route during December,” said Dhoogra. Crash data continues to underline the importance of individual driver responsibility Analysis of crash statistics and traffic data on the N3 Toll Route reveal that human error remains the top contributing factor to both light and heavy motor vehicle crashes (69% in case of light motor vehicle and 83% in heavy motor vehicle crashes), said Dhoogra. ALSO READ | Traffic affected on the N3 south near Heidelberg after 9 trucks torched Of the total number of crashes recorded last year, the main types of crashes were single vehicles leaving the road or single vehicles rolling; followed by head-tail collisions; side swipes and multiple pile-ups. Dhoogra said these factors all point to negligent driving, including speeding, a general lack of concentration, distractedness, aggressive driving behaviour and ignoring road signs. Mechanical vehicle failure, including brake failure and tyre bursts, contributed to an average of 11% of light motor vehicles crashes and 13% of heavy motor vehicle incidents. These incidents are avoidable by keeping vehicles roadworthy and in good mechanical order. Litter is not only unsightly, but may pose serious safety threats She said maintenance teams collect more than 6000 bags of rubbish along the N3 Toll Route each month. Besides the rubbish that can be bagged, debris such as metal, rubber, vehicle parts and dropped loads may pose serious road safety, health and environmental threats. N3TC’s route patrol teams sweep the entire route in both directions daily to remove dangerous objects. Additionally, they respond to reported scenes to remove possible dangerous objects from the road as quickly as possible. They will double their efforts during the upcoming peak traffic season, but road users can assist them even further by reporting potentially dangerous objects in the road to N3TC’s Route Control Centre on its 24-hour helpline: 0800 63 43 57. ALSO READ | New truck stop opens off N3 in Pietermaritzburg Visible law enforcement and partnerships enhance road safety There will be an increased presence of law enforcement and emergency service providers, including community medical services. They will be highly visible and stationed at various key points along the route to swiftly respond to emergency situations. Travellers should prepare for multiple traffic checkpoints along the N3 corridor where random alcohol and drug screening tests as well as vehicle roadworthiness checks will be performed. Speed timing enforcement is in place along the entire N3 Toll Route. Take care at toll plazas 11,6% of the total number of crashes recorded on the N3 Toll Route during 2019, occurred in the vicinity of toll plazas. These incidents can easily be avoided by adhering to the various warning signs and slowing down early enough on approach to a toll plaza,” said Dhoogra. “Reduce your speed and remain alert around toll plazas, especially when congestion is experienced during peak traffic conditions. To further assist road users choosing the correct plaza lane, we have upgraded overhead signage at all toll plazas.” Traffic forecasts The traffic forecasts below provide an indication of the expected traffic volumes and peak conditions on the N3 Toll Route in a southbound direction (towards KwaZulu-Natal) and a northbound direction (towards Gauteng) this holiday season. Slow moving conditions are expected when traffic volumes are high. High (heavy) volumes constitute more than 1500 vehicles per hour in a particular direction. On the N3 Toll Route volumes can increase to between 2000 and 3500 vehicles per hour on peak days.   N3TC advises all road users to follow reputable information sources to keep abreast of all current conditions, traffic updates and alerts on the N3 Toll Route. “Real-time traffic information greatly assists road users to be better-prepared and safer drivers. We therefore encourage you to heed all the warning signs on the road, and also to involve your passengers in talking to us on Facebook or Twitter: @N3Route or to obtain current and verified traffic information from N3TC’s 24-hour helpline: 0800 63 43 57. This number can also be called should you need help during emergencies or to report any problems while travelling on the N3 between Heidelberg and Cedara,” concluded Dhoogra.