KWAZULU-NATAL Premier, Sihle Zikalala, on Thursday called for the amendment of the country’s Constitution. The current Constitution, Zikalala said, was an impediment to the aspirations of black people. Speaking at the Mandela Capture Site in Howick during celebrations to mark 24 years since the Constitution was adopted, Zikalala said black people were likely to remain trapped in poverty if they document was not amended. In its current form, Zikalala said, the Constitution made it difficult for government to speed up the process of transforming the economy. “Without enforcing radical economic transformation, blacks in general and Africans in particular will remain at the periphery as if they have no government that they voted to represent their aspirations. “In this regard, we must forge ahead in reviewing our prescripts that hinder transformation especially section 25 of the Constitution to give effect to land redistribution, including enforcing expropriation of land without compensation,” he said. National Parliament is currently in the process of amending section 25 of the Constitution to make it possible for the government to expropriate land without compensation. To speed up the transformation of the economy, government adopted the Preferential Procurement Policy Framework (PPPF) meant to empower previously disadvantaged businesses people. However, the Supreme Court of Appeal last month ruled that the PPPF was invalid. Zikalala said the judgment made it impossible for KwaZulu-Natal to implement its radical economic transformation policy. “When we say South Africa belongs to all who live in it, we equally mean the betterment of our country lies in our hands, as equal compatriots: African, White, Coloured and Indian communities,” Zikalala said. The call for radical economic transformation, Zikalala said, was not a stance against white people. “Equally, we must fight the killings of farmers and agree that violence and murder is not a solution to our problems. “At the end, we must achieve peaceful coexistence and harmony where all people will enjoy decent livelihoods and where their human rights are protected,” he said.