The Southern African Alcohol Policy Alliance in South Africa (Saapa SA) has called on the government to urgently put alcohol restrictions in place ahead of the festive season. In a Zoom meeting on Wednesday with journalists and organisations who are calling for stricter alcohol laws, Maurice Smithers, Saapa SA’s director, said the increased social activities over this period, especially those that can be described as ‘super-spreader’ events, are likely to result in a spike in Covid-19 infections. ALSO READ | BREAKING | A 10 pm curfew for SA's Covid-19 hotspots and new booze restrictions, NCCC recommends He said the ability to adhere to Covid-19 protocols becomes greatly diminished when alcohol is consumed. Restrictions on the sale of alcohol could also limit other alcohol-related harms, including alcohol-related violence against women and children.  Smithers said they were suggesting that night clubs not be allowed to operate, ban all special offers for reduced alcoholic beverages at least until the end of the state of disaster, that all on consumption liquor outlets be closed from 6 pm on December 15, 16, 23, 24, 25, 26, 31 and on January 1 and 2. “This is not to disallow drinking completely, it’s simply to say that from 6 pm they should close on those days to discourage the excessive use of alcohol in overcrowded venues and to limit the potential of a super spreader event.” ALSO READ | Covid-19: NCCC meets to decide on alcohol, curfews and hot spot restrictions Charles Parry, director of the Alcohol, Tobacco & Other Drugs Research Unit at the South African Medical Research Council explained why research shows this is a good move to curb infections of Covid-19. He said promoting the consumption of alcohol at this time should be prohibited as this encourages excessive drinking. “The alcohol and marketing industry will say that promotion of alcohol gets people to choose different brands but in fact there is strong research showing that it is linked to, for example young people drinking earlier and drinking heavier. So I think marketing should be taken out the picture during this this time of Covid-19 until the vaccines available.” Parry said marketing should only be allowed at points of sales or to those shopping online. Caro Smit, of South Africans Against Drunk Driving, said there was too little emphasis on drinking and driving in South Africa and said the government needs to be more proactive rather than reactive. “We need to revive breath testing in every town and city. “We are also need to have traffic cops on duty 24 hours a day because the main time that the people drink and drive and when the crashes and deaths occur, is in the evening and over weekends when many traffic officers are not on duty,” said Smit. The lobby groups have made these proposals to the Ministerial Advisory Committee to the National Coronavirus Command Council.