A well-known Durban attorney, who had been spared jail time, got more than she bargained for when she appealed her theft conviction — a five-year sentence. Jayshree Baijnath was initially handed a six-year suspended sentence for stealing R644 989 from Deomathy Singh for the sale of her house. Dissatisfied with the conviction, she challenged it on appeal, prompting the state to ask that her sentence be increased because it was “shockingly inappropriate and too lenient”. Yesterday, Judge Mahendra Chetty ruled against her in a judgment handed down in the Pietermaritzburg high court, which was concurred with by Judge Jerome Mnguni.  Judge Chetty said: “In my view, the sentence imposed by the trial court pays lip service to the seriousness of the offence for which the legislature has seen it fit to determine a mandatory minimum sentence.” It also pays lip service to the impact that the misappropriation of funds by attorneys has on the public, said Judge Chetty. The judge said the suggestion in the trial court that Baijnath’s ability to compensate the Attorneys Fidelity Fund would be impaired should she be sentenced to direct imprisonment, constitutes a “misdirection”. “It is the equivalent of a bank robber pleading that a return of the money to the bank or to its insurer is sufficient restoration to avoid imprisonment.” Baijnath was convicted in March 2017 in the Durban regional court. The evidence presented by the state, said the judge, showed that she misappropriated money received by her as a sole practitioner and with the intention of permanently depriving Singh and her son, Umesh, of their money. They were reimbursed through the Attorneys Fidelity Fund, which provides a safety net for those who suffer financial prejudice arising from the theft of trust money by attorneys in the course of their practice, he added. Umesh bought a house from his mother. After the transfer went through, Baijanath was supposed to transfer R644 989 into his mother’s account but didn’t. The judge said the trial magistrate was correct in finding Baijanath guilty. On sentencing, he said he agrees with the state that the imposition of a non-custodial sentence minimises the gravity of the offence, particularly where a professional such as an attorney occupies a position of trust. Judge Chetty said Baijnath only has herself to blame for the misappropriation of trust money from her account. The trial court misdirected itself by focusing disproportionately on the financial implication of her conduct, added the judge. The magistrate found that if she were to be removed from society and imprisoned, she would not be able to function using her legal skills or any other that she has acquired and will become a burden to society. Judge Chetty said that this conclusion ignores the fact that she has already been struck from the roll of attorneys.