 KwaZulu-Natal Premier Sihle Zikalala has issued a strong warning and has appealed to parents and pupils not to organise or take part in celebrations in the province which flout current Covid-19 safety protocols and which could endanger lives. “With the end of year comes the end of school for learners especially matrics as they enter the new world of tertiary education or work." Zikalala said he wants to warn all pupils against attending "events such as Rage and others known as Throw the Pen Away after parties". he said at most of these gatherings young people mingle in large groups, indulge in alcohol binges and "other wanton activities". “We want to reiterate that these are 'super spreader' activities which endanger the lives of young people and expose them and ultimately all those around them to the coronavirus,” he said. ALSO READ | WATCH | 'Was it worth the risk of catching Covid? I must say yes' - matric at Ballito Rage party Zikalala said already the Department of Health has identified the Rage 2020 as one such “super-spreader”. “We are however also aware that similar events to mark the end of schooling are also scheduled in various parts of the province and in parks and so-called 'underground' venues. “We again wish to warn all those who intend to hold such events that this is against the regulations and we will not hesitate to apply the full extent and might of the law to deal with any such transgressions wherever they occur.” ALSO READ | Now JBay Rage 2020 festival cancelled due to Covid-19 concerns He said all large gatherings which involve excessive consumption of alcohol are characterised by risky behaviour and pose a real threat to the national effort to fight the spread of the coronavirus. “We expect parents to play a leading role in guiding their children to celebrate this important milestone in their lives in a responsible manner that will ensure that the children are safe to enter the next stage of their lives after matric. In general, all our youth should be reminded that they are important weapons in the fight against Covid-19. This generation of young people must in playing their part, identify themselves as the generation that defeated Covid-19. “We also wish to state the country is still under lockdown and that the state of disaster is still fully in place,” said Zikalala. 