Three family members were butchered to death with what is believed to be a bushknife in yet another farm attack incident at a sugar cane farm at Bishopstowe near Pietermaritzburg on Monday. The three family members included a 58-year-old man, a 60-year-old woman and an 84-year-old man. Sources at the scene said one man’s body was found lying dead in what looked like a tool shed, while the other two family members’ bodies were found inside the house. ALSO READ | FARM ATTACK | Elderly woman critical after attack with rake The source said they were not sure if anything was stolen by the assailants as yet but they suspect that money was taken as the farm workers were due to be paid on Tuesday morning. The fridge in the kitchen was also ransacked. Another source said the couple’s son said he had last spoken to them just before 6 pm and after not being able to reach them later, got worried. A relative allegedly came to check on them and made the gruesome discovery. The sugar cane field was set on fire. CWP Security Services director Sibongiseni Sibiya, who was among those who responded to the emergency call, said the motive for the attack was not yet known.   ALSO READ | UPDATED: Elderly man who was shot dead at his smallholding farm in KwaZulu-Natal named Sibiya said law enforcement officers were still combing the scene for clues that could help them catch the suspects. Attempts to get comment from the police on Monday night were unsuccessful. The Witness reported on Saturday that the KwaZulu-Natal countryside was rocked by another farm attack in which an elderly smallholder, Bill Theron (85), was gunned down at his home near Albert Falls Dam, in Crammond. That incident came hot on the heels of the murder of 80-year-old Mponzana Khumalo, who was shot in the chest while checking on the family’s cattle in Nkomba, near Muden, recently. ALSO READ | ‘No motive, no clues’ in latest KZN farm murder While Khumalo was robbed of his cellphone and money and then left tied to a tree, nothing was reportedly taken from Theron. *This is a developing story, more information to follow.