As the coronavirus spreads across China, it has been a dash
to get back to South Africa — and safety — for many locals who have been living
and working in the country for many years. For Pietermaritzburg sisters Mriska (29) and 21-year-old
Mischa Singh, both University of KwaZulu-Natal graduates who have been teaching
English there, the trip back home was not an easy path. Glad that they are finally home, Mriska, who was teaching
English in Beijing, said when they first found out about the virus and its
effects, in the middle of January, it was not taken as a serious issue. “Everyone just thought it was something that would blow over
and we were too far away to be directly affected. But as the virus spread, the
government clamped down on everything and the city became a ghost town,” she
said. Overnight the Chinese capital, like other cities across the
country, became deserted after imposing restrictions and shut down public
spaces. Although Beijing is not under a strict government-ordered
lockdown, like in Wuhan — which is the “epicentre” of the virus outbreak — it
has, however, imposed restrictions on every aspect of life since declaring the
highest level of public health emergency on January 24. This shutdown across most of China has caused the country
and, to an extent, its economy to grind to a halt. “We were fine for about a week after the restrictions were
imposed and then we started seeing the impact of it. We were not allowed out of
our apartments. In any case we did not want to leave for fear of becoming
infected. “Each person entering or leaving the apartment had to
provide details of where they were going to and who they have been in contact
with. Most of the businesses, schools, shops and everything else is closed. “Water was the first commodity to run out as stocks are not
being replenished and then it was food items,” said Mriska. For the Chinese, the December and January period is heralded
as the Spring Festival and many use that time to splurge on travel and
vacations. Mischa, who lives and teaches in Yanjaio in the Hebei
province, just outside Beijing, was at Disneyland in Shanghai and woke up to
overnight news that the city was on lockdown as a result of the virus. “I just packed my bags and headed for the airport. I didn’t
want to be stranded in a hotel in Shanghai. The airport was an absolute mess
but I eventually managed to get a flight to Beijing, where I spent a few days
with my sister before heading back,” said Mischa. But that was nothing compared to what she would find when
she returned to Yanjaio and then tried to leave there again. “When I got back, it was already a ghost town. There was not
a soul to be seen. We couldn’t even get masks. Because it is a smaller village,
people were very scared. Soon there was no food and water,” said Mischa. At the same time, the sisters were arranging to return to South
Africa. “We couldn’t go to work as everything was shut down and we
were also growing scared that if we delayed we would not be able to leave as
most airlines were clamping down on their flights out of China,” said Mriska. When they eventually made their arrangements, it was another
battle to get Mischa from Yanjaio to Beijing. “The subways were not running and neither were there any
taxis available as people were not taking chances and coming out of their
homes. I had to call a Chinese friend, who knew another person who drove a
taxi, and after three attempts got a taxi to come to Beijing. I just had to try
anyway I could to get to Beijing to my sister so we could fly out,” said
Mischa. “I eventually managed to get a taxi but the journey to
Beijing was long and difficult. It’s normally a 45-minute trip for the 36 km,
but the border posts were busy and the authorities had to stop each car and
check on each person. “Every person had to have their temperatures checked and
sign forms indicating where they were from and where they were going to.” At the same time, as news of the deaths from the virus
spread, fear-mongering grew. “My Chinese friend returned from vacation to find
she had nowhere to live. Her flatmates had changed the password on the access
system and locked her out as she had been travelling and they were not prepared
to take the risk,” said Mriska. Eventually leaving China on February 3, the sisters flew to
Dubai and then arrived in South Africa on February 7. “We booked our flights and kept monitoring to see that it
wasn’t cancelled as most airlines were cancelling their flights. We were lucky. “We arrived at the airport six hours ahead of our flight to
make sure everything would run smoothly only to find horrendous queues and
thousands of people from all over the world also trying to get out of China
while they could. “Everyone was wearing masks, and even on the flights we had
to keep it on,” said Mischa. Landing with masks on in Dubai, she said, was pretty
awkward, as other travellers distanced themselves from them and gave them
strange looks because it was evident they were from China because of the masks. “At Dubai and in South Africa, upon landing we were
subjected to temperature checks and had to fill in forms advising where we had
been travelling from and if we were ill,” said Mischa. Glad that they are back home, the sisters said they were thankful
to be away from the outbreak. “We have work commitments and will have to go back once all
of this is over. But we are just glad to be home, to have drinking water and
food, fresh air and be safe,” said Mriska. Their parents, Kamal and Jasmin Singh, were due to fly to
China on February 7 to visit their daughters but had to cancel their trip as
well. “We were stressed out and encouraged the girls to come home.
We are just glad that they got here in time and that they are safe,” said
Jasmin. ‘Suffering and sadness around’ Veteran KZN journalist Martin Challenor, who lives in
Yinzhou District, Ningbo, with his wife Kathy, said on Facebook that they
ventured out of their apartment on their ebikes only to buy food. He said all non-essential businesses, bars, restaurants and
some malls had closed. “The medical authorities keep us updated on the virus
through WeChat. The day starts in a macabre way — checking the statistics about
the virus. There are as of now [Tuesday] 1 017 deaths and 42 714 confirmed
cases. “The statistics are updated far too often for my liking.
There are cellphone apps that tell me there were 13 cases in my suburb, the
closest being 707 metres away from me right now. “I do not like being confined to my flat. One person can go
out to shop every second day. People returning to China and their homes from
other cities are subjected to 14 days quarantine. These measures are needed
because the virus spreads so easily and because a person can spread the virus
for 14 days after catching it and before falling ill themselves. I am growing
weaker through inactivity. There is so much suffering and sadness around me,”
reads his post. Recommended safety measures Although there are no reported cases of the coronavirus in
South Africa, practising recommended measures advised by the World Health
Organisation will help in the long-term. • Wash your hands frequently with soap and water or use an
alcohol-based hand rub if your hands are not visibly dirty. Why? Washing your hands with soap and water or using
alcohol-based hand rub eliminates the virus if it is on your hands. • Practice respiratory hygiene When coughing and sneezing, cover mouth and nose with flexed
elbow or tissue — discard tissue immediately into a closed bin and clean your
hands with alcohol-based hand rub or soap and water. Why? Covering your mouth and nose when coughing and sneezing
prevent the spread of germs and viruses. If you sneeze or cough into your
hands, you may contaminate objects or people that you touch. • Maintain social distancing Maintain at least a one-metre distance between yourself and
other people, particularly those who are coughing, sneezing and have a fever. Why? When someone who is infected with a respiratory disease
like 2019-nCoV coughs or sneezes, they project small droplets containing the
virus. If you are too close, you can breathe in the virus. • Avoid touching eyes, nose and mouth Why? Hands touch many surfaces which can be contaminated
with the virus. If you touch your eyes, nose or mouth with your contaminated
hands, you can transfer the virus from the surface to yourself. • If you have a fever, cough and difficulty breathing, seek
medical care early Tell your health care provider if you have travelled in an
area in China where 2019-nCoV has been reported, or if you have been in close
contact with someone who has travelled from China and has respiratory symptoms. Why? Whenever you have fever, cough and difficulty breathing
it is important to seek medical attention promptly as this may be due to a
respiratory infection or other serious condition. Respiratory symptoms with
fever can have a range of causes, and depending on your personal travel history
and circumstances, 2019-nCoV could be one of them. • If you have mild respiratory symptoms and no travel
history to or within China, carefully practice basic respiratory and hand
hygiene and stay home until you are recovered, if possible. • As a general precaution, practice general hygiene measures
when visiting live animal markets, wet markets or animal product markets. Ensure regular hand washing with soap and potable water
after touching animals and animal products; avoid touching eyes, nose or mouth
with hands; and avoid contact with sick animals or spoiled animal products.
Strictly avoid any contact with other animals in the market (e.g., stray cats
and dogs, rodents, birds, bats). Avoid contact with potentially contaminated animal waste or
fluids on the soil or structures of shops and market facilities. • Avoid consumption of raw or undercooked animal products Handle raw meat, milk or animal organs with care, to avoid
cross-contamination with uncooked foods, as per good food safety practices. — World Health Organisation. 