On Sunday [last week], the guy and I needed to get out of town. We’d had
the stink of the dump fire in chunks, and you know how bad I am when confronted
with a bad smell. We had an errand to run in Howick and decided to head off
into the nearby Midlands for a bite to eat. Anyway, there we were sitting on the veranda of a restaurant
we both love. The sun was shining, the air was clear and we were breathing
sweet lungfuls of it. The wine was cold and the ice blocks accompanying it of the
most pleasing shape. The hills were lush, the birds were trilling sweetly and
the food was good. Bliss! Then, in walked a party of youngsters to take up the table
next to us. It was an occasion of sorts. There was Champagne. Mom and dad left
the kids to themselves and moved inside so the kids could enjoy their lunch
unchaperoned, as it were. Spirits were high and there was much banter. It all looked
like such fun and we were happy to be seated next to them. We couldn’t help
overhearing much of what was said, because we were right there, and they spoke
in bright, animated tones, with an air of joie de vivre given their buoyant
young spirits. I gathered that they were mostly probably from private
schools. They were well spoken and seemed well versed in ordering off a nice
menu. They chatted easily among themselves and in gaps in our
conversation we heard what they were saying. The subject shifted around,
meandering fluidly here and there as conversation does, until it landed, like a
big fat fly, on a particular girl, whose name and surname were mentioned. Very
loudly. The girls at the table morphed from sweet darlings to nasty
vixens picking their victim apart, as their male companions chipped in with
disparaging comments and noises. I was floored. The name of her school — a very good school in our
city — was uttered with disdain. They were discussing her life in the most
personal terms. When they spoke about her, their tone indicated a bad smell.
It was a vicious attack and I was completely blindsided by the venom of it. There was no regard for the fact that we could obviously
hear what they said. Perhaps they’d had too much of the two bottles of bubbly
that sat at their table, so loose were their tongues. I think they were
underage, so drinking did not agree with them perhaps. I felt sick for the poor
girl whose name was being tossed about like a kitten among a bunch of bullies.
I was nauseated by the obvious glee they had in doing so. Every time one of
them got a jibe in I felt less like eating. I couldn’t intervene. I felt it was not my fight. But there
was steam coming out of my ears and at one point I turned around and looked at
them and said: “Are you serious?”. I know, I know. Childish, passive aggressive, call it what
you will. I hoped this would make them realise others could hear them and
they’d stop, but they took no notice of me. And I wondered what the genesis of
this brazen cruelty was. Where had they learned to speak like this, so openly and
confidently, and without shame at their cutting words? Of course, young girls and boys can be awful at times.
Really awful. But in my day, we were awful in hushed tones, I think. We didn’t
have society’s permission to be so nasty and so in-your-face with it and we
certainly wouldn’t have been like that in earshot of adults who may disapprove. Or have we taught our kids nowadays that nothing they do is
beyond reproach? Have we made that parenting mistake, most of us in different
measures? Or is it because they’re mimicking us adults? I thought of Facebook and social media, and how it seems to
unleash the worst unkindness in so many people. Spats between people are
everywhere online and there are no holds barred in what becomes a deluge of
poison unleashed on the day’s victim. People pick and pick and pick at a person
like a child with a tempting, juicy scab. This bullying and public shaming has become a national
sport. It’s almost like a competition to see who can outdo the others in their
level of acrimony and their unintelligent jibes. Sexists, religious nuts, racists, everyday curmudgeons and
the plain nasty — they all like being offended and love hitting back even more. This happens even on the most innocuous of sites. I belong
to a cookery group on Facebook which embraces a community of people who are
learning to bake. People proudly post pictures of their amateur creations and
far too often they and their offerings are mocked. There is a scornful tone that I just can’t get used to. It
is such anti-social behaviour. When did we learn to behave like this? Have we
lost our shame at behaving badly in public? Is this where these girls learned
this behaviour? Perhaps we need to all work on our manners and kindness. Can
we make it a point to teach this to our kids, to think before we speak? It’s
especially important when you don’t know exactly what’s happening in the other
person’s life. If one person thinks twice before they post something, the space
I’ve used writing this will have been worth it. Now go and be compassionate to each other this weekend and
have a blast doing it.