An Emeritus professor at UKZN was kicked and manhandled by students, as violent protests once again flared up across campuses. Professor Erwin Brüning (77), a German national who is a research fellow at the maths department, had confronted students who had blockaded an entrance to the Westville campus and was kicked and pulled by the scruff of his neck and pushed around by students. Brüning is an award-winning academic in maths who has held positions at universities in several countries. Students also set fire to a gymnasium, as well as washing machines, mattresses, microwaves, fridges, stove units and chairs, and threw bed frames and bottles out of windows outside P Block and Oval Residences on the Westville campus on Wednesday morning. Student leaders warned that violence was likely to continue if the university does not address grievances around historical debt. Students brazenly antagonised police, and some were videoed jumping on police vans. At the Pietermaritzburg campus, there were reports of students setting fire to paper inside toilet cubicles. A lecture was disrupted at Howard College and students vacated the lecture theatre, but no one was caught by the university’s Risk Management Services (RMS) for that. The academic programme, which had resumed on Monday following a two-week closure, proceeded in spite of Wednesday’s disruptions. Students have been protesting over having to pay some of their historical debt to the university before being able to register for this year. The university has been rocked by violent protests this year, and buildings at the Westville and Pietermaritzburg campuses have been set alight.  Protesting fizzled out by mid-morning on Wednesday as heavy rain lashed Durban. This week, the University of KwaZulu-Natal Staff Union (Uksu) staged a massive strike to protest unsafe conditions for staff during protests. Brüning told The Witness he had to have stitches to the palm of his left hand, but that he was otherwise fine. He referred questions about the attack on him to the university communications department but said the authorities “must take some serious action to get rid of these criminal elements”. He is, however, undeterred by the attack and will be back in his office on Thursday. UKZN condemned the attack. “We are currently viewing video footage to identify the perpetrator and those found to be responsible will be handed over to law enforcement for prosecution. “There is no place at the university for criminality.” Staff sources said many members of staff caught wind of possible protest action before Wednesday, and heeded an internal memo sent out on Tuesday which said staff could use their own discretion when confronted by protesters and choose to leave the university. A heavy police presence included two riot vans parked at the Westville campus on Wednesday. Police officers stood in the recently burnt RMS headquarters on Westville campus surveying the area as heavy rain bucketed down over Durban. One eyewitness said: “Protesting suddenly started early in the morning. I heard loud noises at about 5 am and I went out and saw students throwing bed [frames] down the stairs from P Block [residence]. There was suddenly smoke coming from the road and we saw things being set on fire.” The SRC president at Westville campus, Moses Nkambako, said some students have already started going home because they were unable to register because of debt. He predicted students will continue protesting if management does not meet demands. “Things are falling apart at this university while management is sleeping. Our stance as the SRC is that unrest will continue so long as students have to pay historical debt.” Nkambako said that he was alerted to the protests on Wednesday morning, and said “students are leading themselves” into protesting, saying SRC members could not rally students because the university recently took out an interdict against this. Asked whether he condoned students destroying property, he said: “If I was there, I could have kept them calm but I had no chance to do that because we are interdicted. Students are helpless and have no leaders.” UKZN on Tuesday sent an internal communiqué to staff, notifying them that they are in fact allowed to leave campus if they decide it’s too dangerous during protesting. The communiqué, seen by The Witness, says staff should refrain from videoing any protesting because they may be victimised. The communiqué listed emergency contact numbers for staff. It was previously thought that support staff in particular had no authority to leave if things got dangerous, but this communiqué says this would be considered a “condoned absence” and staff would not need to fill in a leave application. UKZN told The Witness: “Employees are an important asset and resource in any organisation. Hence the notice that staff are kindly advised to take precautionary measures in the event of imminent danger. “For safety purposes, staff members are encouraged to exercise their discretion and judgment by leaving the buildings and, where necessary, the university premises.”