You find yourself in hot water and you think your only
solution is to dash off to the nearest police station and open a false charge. Poof! Your problems have disappeared, or so you thought. That’s of course until the long arm of the law gets its grip
on you. Opening a false case is an offence and whoever is found to
do so will be charged with perjury, warned Colonel Thembeka Mbele. She was asked about the seriousness of the offence in the
wake of a Pietermaritzburg teenager allegedly lying to police that she had been
abducted at Capital Centre when she ran off with her boyfriend and friend. Police efforts to track down the kidnapper after the
teenager was found, revealed that she had told her family lies. The young woman initially said she was kidnapped while
walking out of the Pep store at Capital Centre. A white cloth was placed over
her nose and mouth to drug her. She said she was taken away in a vehicle that had seven
other girls inside, and “three or more” abductors. She went on to say that she “found” herself at the Market
Square taxi rank the day afterwards. Her family said she looked as if she was
still drugged. Police spokesperson Sergeant Mthokozisi Ngobese said
yesterday that the woman has not been charged with perjury because the matter
is still under investigation. Mbele continued: “We cannot tolerate people who are opening
false cases to fulfil their needs. “The state uses a lot of manpower and resources that should
be used to fight serious and violent crimes.” There have been many arrests made in relation to people who
open false cases. “... The courts will decide the befitting sentence to impose
on the accused,” she said. Clinical psychologist Prishika Pillay said that people who
commit perjury understand the consequences of their wrongdoing, which is why
they lie. “When they lie they are hoping that someone would believe in
their lie ... they deny the truth and fabricate a situation hoping that someone
would believe them,” she said. Pillay said that when a person performs an act, he or she
has the mental capacity to understand what they are doing. When a person lies under oath there is an intent to mislead
the court. Pillay added she did not think it was better to lie. People who commit criminal acts have a personality which
defies morality, integrity and respect for human values and the law, she added. Recent cases Simply put, perjury is any intentionally false statement
made under oath or affirmation. While there is no prescribed sentence for perjury, the
presiding officer can impose any sentence — ranging from a fine or suspended sentence
to a term of imprisonment, said a legal source. Attorney Siva Chetty said that in the district court the
sentence can go up to three years’ imprisonment while in the regional court it
can reach up to 10 years’ imprisonment. In October, a Durban man who was charged for opening a false
case was convicted and sentenced to a R1 000 fine. Police spokesperson Colonel Thembeka Mbele said Thabo Donono
Mkhuphuki (25) had pleaded guilty in the Ramsgate Magistrate’s Court. On September 28, Mkhuphuki reported that his vehicle was
hijacked in the Margate area. He alleged that he picked up a hitchhiker who
hijacked him. “Detectives probing the case were not convinced with his
story and he later admitted that he was not hijacked after being confronted
with their suspicions by detectives. A case of defeating the ends of justice
was opened against him and he was charged,” she said. The year before, a Gauteng resident found herself in hot
water after reporting her car as stolen on the corner of OR Tambo and Louise
Street. It was reported that while investigating this, the police
officer who was working on the docket realised that the registration number
which the woman had given him was a false registration plate number. When the police officer confronted the woman about the
discrepancies in the statement she had given to law enforcement officials, she
immediately admitted that she had attempted to mislead the SAPS, and was
promptly arrested. The woman was charged with perjury.