With the Dusi Canoe Marathon just five days away, the raw
sewage spills into the Msunduzi River are at an all-time high, causing a
serious hazard to hundreds of paddlers’ health. The famous three-day Dusi Canoe Marathon race is scheduled
to start on Thursday from Camps Drift in Pietermaritzburg, and will finish at
Durban’s Blue Lagoon on Saturday. But according to a statement by the Duzi uMngeni
Conversation Trust (Duct), the state of Msunduzi River is diabolical at the
moment. The issue of poor water quality in the river has been a hot
topic for a while now with paddlers worried about their safety after 66% of
participants in last year’s race suffered “Dusi Guts”. To avoid more “Dusi Guts” this year, Duct, in partnership
with S-Cubed Sports, have sourced a private sponsor, Euro Steel, to purchase
much-needed equipment — three high-pressure cleaner nozzles and four truck
batteries to aid the Msunduzi Municipality Sanitation Branch ahead of the race. “The very high E. coli count in Duzi water is relatively
easy to determine, and the higher the E. coli count, the more likely that the
water is carrying enough pathogens to be dangerous,” said Sanele Vilakazi from
Duct. “The most commonly reported symptoms of E. coli infection
are stomach cramps, diarrhea, vomiting and fever. Raw sewage spills into the
Duzi River are at an all-time high and we are hopeful that this donation will
bring about the much-needed change to the current situation. “The Msunduzi River from the Camps Drift moving downstream
is showing high levels of pollution.” The donation comes after Duct raised concerns for the health
and safety of race participants as sewer leaks and block­ages along the river
racecourse were polluting the water. “This is all in an effort to improve the very poor water
quality numbers of the Msunduzi River, which continuously records high faecal
pollution counts from results produced by Umgeni Water,” said Vilakazi. “These four batteries and nozzles will get the
municipality’s honeysuckers and sewer rodding trucks up and running again.
Their fleet of trucks will be mobile again. The nozzles will assist the
sanitation unit in the quick and effective unblocking/maintenance of sewers.” However, chairperson of the Dusi committee Shane le Breton
downplayed the Duct statements and said everything would be fine before the
race starts on Thursday. “That has been miscommunicated,” said Le Breton. “Duct themselves, what they do is they work together with
the municipality to identify sewer manholes that are broken and overflowing.
So, what happened last is that we had a meeting with the [Msunduzi] mayor and
deputy mayor to highlight the issues of this manhole through Duct and the mayor
and the deputy mayor have given us full support to clean just before the Dusi. “From that meeting, they have started with one of five
manholes which were identified that cause the issues which can affect the race.
If we can get those manholes completed prior to the race then we should be
fine.” Meanwhile, Umgeni Water has promised to add another
significant contribution to the race with a release of water from Henley and
Inanda dams to the river before the Dusi Canoe Marathon. “An estimated 800 megalitres will be released over 26 hours,
ending at 10 am on February 27. This will raise the level of the Msunduzi River
so that canoeists are able to move through it with ease during the race. “It will also flush the river, thereby improving river water
quality,” said Umgeni Water’s Shami Harichunder.