UKZN’s biggest staff union is calling for the university’s director of human resources to be fired for allegedly failing to protect workers during periods of student violence. The University of KwaZulu-Natal Staff Union (Uksu) also wants the university to fire all department deputy vice chancellors and deans of schools, saying there is mismanagement and a complete disconnect between the higher structures and staff. Uksu, which has a complement of nearly 2 000 members made up of academic and support staff, yesterday staged a strike on the Westville campus, where members demanded to meet with the vice chancellor, Professor Nana Poku. The union wants executive director of human resources Dr Siphelele Zulu to be fired, alleging that he has failed to adequately attend to any of the union’s grievances during his two-year tenure. This staff discontent has added to an already heated atmosphere at the university, which had its academic programme suspended for two weeks because of violent protests by students. The academic programme resumed peacefully on Monday. Uksu wants UKZN to, among other things, review salary ranges and conditions, and to attend to unequal workloads and “inflexibility” of the Key Performance Assessment (KPA) system the university uses. The union criticised the university for not allowing support staff to leave campus when the academic programme is suspended due to student protests. Students lined the quad at the Westville campus watching Uksu members pour in from different UKZN campuses on Monday morning. Police and private security members were there in full force. The union marched from the quad to the MW Makgoba Administration Building, where they demanded to meet with Poku. Uksu had met with management last February, and the matter went through arbitration and later a private mediation. With no joy after all that, the union decided to down tools. Uksu’s Gill Manion told The Witness: “There’s no strategy to protect staff during violent strikes. Support staff have no automatic permission to leave the university and have to get permission from their line manager, who may not be available. “Staff always feel under threat; we’ve had cases of members being pepper sprayed and attacked.” Regarding the KPA system, Manion said: “The system is inflexible and it’s too generic, so if someone is, say, good at research, the university will not let that person work to their strengths.” The union was unable to properly meet with Poku on Monday, but were greeted by Zulu, who informed them that Poku was locked in important meetings. Zulu told members that he would relay a memorandum to Poku, but members said they had previously given the university their demands, and had no memorandum to give. Trying to explain why some of the grievances were still unresolved, Zulu told the crowd that many of the union’s issues were not straightforward, and some were policy-, governance- or administration-centred. He noted that the university always engaged with Uksu “in good faith”, and that the university had set a time-frame for when issues would be resolved. Uksu’s executive was only able to meet Poku late on Monday. UKZN did not respond to specific questions, but said: “Management continues to engage with Uksu and is of the understanding that the negotiations are still in progress.” The university said Uksu was made aware of time-frames for resolving grievances earlier this month. “The university management is committed to engage further with Uksu on these matters. Employees’ safety and well-being remain a priority for management. We encourage all parties to engage constructively to find a long-term solution to these issues.” UKZN’s executive director for human resources, Dr Siphelele Zulu, said yesterday that staff members at the Pietermaritzburg campus who joined students in a protest two weeks ago, complaining of their own issues, are being disciplined. Zulu mentioned this when he was being questioned by the University of KwaZulu-Natal Staff Union (Uksu) during a heated meeting on Monday. The union had asked Zulu why the union was told “no work, no pay” for its strike on Monday despite it being a protected strike, when other unions or staff members get away with striking. Zulu said this was not true, and used the example of the staff members in Pietermaritzburg, whom he said had taken part in an unprotected strike, and now face disciplinary action. 