An 11-year-old Ashdown Primary School boy spent his birthday in hospital after he was stabbed in his head with a pair of scissors last Wednesday. Siyanda Hlongwane, a Grade 5 pupil, who subsequently had the scissors removed at the Chief Albert Luthuli Hospital in Durban, is now recuperating at Edendale Hospital. The boy’s mother, Mbalenhle Hlongwane, told The Witness on Wednesday that the scissors had to be pulled out of Siyanda’s head and that has affected his brain function. “Siyanda has not been eating, and he is emotionally scarred from what happened to him. He hasn’t been himself since then. We celebrated his birthday here in hospital last week,” she said. Hlongwane said they were seeking help from a physiotherapist because the boy’s right arm was not functioning well after the incident. “His right arm was affected from what I think is the damage to his brain. He can’t use it all,” said Hlongwane. Siyanda was stabbed in view of his classmates while the teacher had stepped out of the classroom after collecting examination scripts from the pupils. The boy was rushed to hospital with the scissors in his head — and they remained there until they were removed a day later. Hlongwane said she had rushed to hospital after getting news of her son’s injury. “The scissors [were] stuck about 1,8 cm deep into his skull according to the doctors. They said it would be tricky to remove [them],” she said.  The scissors were only removed a day later as it was ‘too tricky’ to remove them immediately.  Now she wants justice to be served as she is concerned about her son’s recovery. “I don’t understand what happened. The boys are friends. Now my child may never have a normal life again,” she said. Hlongwane said she was told that the boys were involved in an argument and her son had been accused of stealing R5, which he denied. Shortly thereafter he was stabbed. “When my son denied stealing the money, he was stabbed. The person first tried to stab my son in the shoulder, but the scissors did not penetrate my son’s flesh as his school uniform protected him. He was then stabbed for the second time, this time in the head where the scissors got stuck,” said the distraught mother. Concerned about her child’s future medical condition and progress at school, she said she would be hesitant to send him back to school if the culprit was still there. “I cannot risk my son’s life. The other child is not only a danger to my son, but to other children as well. I want justice for my son.” KZN Education Department spokesperson Kwazi Mthethwa said they were monitoring the incident and were awaiting an update from the police before they decide on their next step of action. Pietermaritzburg police spokesperson Sergeant Mthokozisi Ngobese said police were investigating a case of assault with intent to do grievous bodily harm. “The accused will be taken to a probation officer. The officer will then decide if there was any criminal capacity in the suspect’s actions. If there is, then the boy will be arrested,” he said. The suspect is currently in the custody of his guardians, as he is a minor. 