Release the whole tape, not just the edited version. That is the challenge posed by the City employee whose voice was captured on a damning audio clip that made rounds on social media over the weekend. On Tuesday The Witness reported on the recording that contains allegations of the “capture” of Msunduzi’s internal audit unit, which the chief audit executive Petrus Mahlaba rejected. On Tuesday the man on the recording challenged his colleague, a former friend who recorded their conversation in December, to release the whole tape. “I want the whole thing out in public so that he can also face the consequences of the things he said in that conversation because I can assure you, he said far worse things,” he said. He claimed that his colleague first plied him with liquor then started discussing sensitive information about some of the disciplinary cases that were pending at City Hall. “I thought that it was just shebeen gossip so I also said some things that I shouldn’t have said because of the sensitive nature of those matters. When I eventually realised that this guy, whom I considered a friend, was on a fishing expedition, I said some incorrect things just to mislead him but that backfired because he is now painting me to be this bad person when I’m actually not.” He alleged the tape has been used to try and blackmail as well as threaten him and his family. He said the person behind the recording threatened to release it to the media and other high profile people if he did not do his bidding. “When he first asked me to help his friends get tenders if I wanted the tape buried, I told him to go ahead and release it but I thought he would release the whole thing because there is some self-incriminating stuff that he said, while my part was mere gossip.” The man said he regretted that the tape had cast doubt on the independence and objectivity of the internal audit unit, saying he apologised for the harm caused by what he said on the recording. “The public deserves to know the truth. They must hear the whole conversation so he must release it. It’s about 45 minutes long, not the bits and pieces that are circulating on social media. I’m ready to take responsibility for my part so he must do the same.”