The City’s traffic department is cracking down on bylaw infringements as part of Msunduzi’s ongoing campaign to restore law and order. Acting chief of traffic Bheki Xulu said they were not just going after reckless drivers and those who park however they please, but also those who infringe on the rights of pedestrians by blocking pavements. He said their team recently received a boost of 23 traffic wardens who would not just be controlling traffic but also deal with drivers who parked recklessly. “We are working to drastically reduce morning and afternoon traffic congestion of vehicles travelling to and from work, as well as reduce lawlessness of drivers in our City by ensuring constant visibility of traffic officers at strategic points on busy roads,” said Xulu. For the past few days the traffic team has been at work around Berg Street as part of the blitz on street mechanics and businesses who put some of their goods on the pavement. Some of the mechanics said they had been fixing cars on the street for more than five years but they all knew it was illegal.  Acting chief of traffic, Bheki Xulu, talking to one of the Berg Street mechanics, Thamsanqa Shezi, on Monday. Xulu said the issue was not just that they blocked parking and the aesthetics, as car parts were often strewn all over the area, but there were serious pollution concerns as fluids like oil ended up in the drains. “It’s also unfair to the business owners in the area because their customers have nowhere to park so they go elsewhere to get the goods and services. For now we are giving them warnings but we will be impounding cars next week if we find them being fixed on the streets,” he said. The mechanics said Msunduzi should consider building shelters for them like it did with street vendors or relocating them to a vacant piece of land like the site of the former Matsheni Beer Hall in Rietief Street. Meanwhile, business owners who placed their goods on pavements also received warnings from the traffic department. These were mostly hardware stores who kept cement, timber and fencing on the pavement. “This is infringing on the pedestrians’ rights because they now have to dodge vehicles on the road since they have nowhere to walk. We also don’t want to see any trucks or vans loading and off-loading on the road because that obstructs traffic and could lead to serious accidents,” said Xulu. Traffic officers also issued fines to truck drivers who parked on the road. Some hardware store owners, such as Yunis Goga, said while they understood what the City was trying to achieve, it was not always practical as some shops had no driveways. He said the transporters’ vans also had nowhere to park. The vans park near the hardware stores in case customers were looking to hire a vehicle for deliveries. But Xulu told them: “This is a public road, you are not allowed to put your stuff on the public road or the pavement. You must make a space in your own premises for trucks or have deliveries done in the evenings. Your business interests must not inconvenience other people and what you are doing is against the law.” Just like the street mechanics, the hardware owners said Msunduzi should consider turning the Matsheni site into a loading zone and transporters’ vans could also park there. City spokesperson Thobeka Mafumbatha said the enforcement of traffic bylaws was part of a bigger campaign to crack down on the infringement of all Msunduzi’s bylaws. “We are not targeting certain parts of the municipality or groups but everyone must know that non-compliance will not be tolerated in any way or form,” she said. She said the campaign would not just focus on the CBD but they will be taking it to other parts of Msunduzi. “We are not going to allow lawlessness to prevail. It’s unfortunate that there are those who are used to doing as they please but those days are over. “We are not just doing this as a once-off, there is a monitoring team that will be coming out on a regular basis to ensure compliance,” said Mafumbatha.