“Erm, no. That’s not mine. I only wanted egg on my toast,” I
said, almost nervously. “@%&*(,” she let rip. “Why don’t you lot make the orders clear when you give them
to me?” she yelled to the man who’d written mine down. Her face was red and she was peeved. She had no compunction
about using sailor language so early in the morning. “Now I bloody well have to start again,” she bristled,
slamming the proferred plate down when I wouldn’t take it. By the seeming magnitude of the task ahead of her, you’d
swear she had to start running the Comrades Marathon all over again, because
she’d been given directions to Estcourt instead of Durban; for her it was
clearly not merely the remaking of my scrambled egg on toast at the Karkloof
Farmer’s Market, sans a slab of ham wedged in between. I felt bad. I didn’t want my vegetarianism to be the reason
she was so cross either. So, I just avoided eye contact with Ms Furious and
slunk back to the table and bench we’d claimed. When my meal came, right this time, it was worth the wait. If you haven’t made the drive up the hill yet to the new
Karkloof market venue, you should consider doing it. We hadn’t got around to
going, although we’d visited the old one often enough. But having been rudely
awoken early one recent Saturday, we jumped up, got dressed and went, before we
could think of an excuse why we shouldn’t. And arriving there, it was pure bliss to be a tourist at the
experience of it all. It’s so beautifully laid out inside a great barn — a
feast of sights, sounds and tastes. The hall bustles with energy and it feels
happy and exciting. I’m going to make you lot jealous and share some of the
sheer delights we found there. The highlight was definitely rhubarb and custard. If there’s
no other reason to go there, it’s for a stall run by a woman who sells
home-made stewed rhubarb layered between yellow clouds of smooth, creamy,
properly made custard. She was selling fresh rhubarb too which I used to make an
apple, cherry and rhubarb crumble. (And if anyone knows where I can buy proper
rhubarb custard sweets here in Pietermaritzburg, you have to let me know. It’s
a flavour I adore and the thing I loved most about Post Offices in England
where great glass jars of them stand on the counters for sale.) Of course, there’s also the old favourite, the nougat stand
with packs of those amazing nougat biscuits. I’ve been known to hide evidence
of having opened a pack from the guy, so I don’t have to share. I can’t help
myself. (Note to self — hide this newspaper from him.) We also bought cheeses good enough to make your eyes mist up
with joy. One, a layered trio of flavours of two different pestos and rich
cream cheese, we had with crackers for a gourmet midweek meal. We bought sharp
cheddars and smooth goudas and creamy yogurts, flavoured and plain, and delight
of all delights — condensed milk in a glass jar. Tantalisingly a deep caramel colour,
I haven’t opened it yet, but I can’t wait. I hope I can bring myself to share
it … We bought fresh local veg in abundance, no plastic packaging
(yay!) and a lighter carbon footprint than those at Woolies. We bought good coffees to wake us up again from the coma
effect of our big breakfast and little gifts of fresh produce and treats for
others. Then we bumped into Stidy! How nice to see a friendly face
and have a quick catch-up with my favourite cartoonist. Investigating the stalls, we resisted the preserves because
there’s a basket-full at home we need to polish off first. I also sadly gave
the book stall a wide berth because the pile of books to be read at home is
teetering and I know I have to decrease its towering Jenga-like construction
before it topples over and buries one of us. Besides, our arms were full and we
could carry no more. There are stalls that offer novel things like kits to sprout
seeds for micro greens and sprouts. There are heirloom-type veg and home-made
baked goods in abundance, catering to those who eat super-healthy and the
overindulgent, and those like us who are both. As we were leaving, we spotted a family selling beautiful,
healthy plants outside the hall, so we dumped the produce on the back seat and
brought the car around to load up the boot with botanical beauties at prices
way cheaper than the fancy nurseries down the hill. I confess we realised we’d got carried away with it all. We
bought too much stuff. It’s easy to be tempted, but less easy to prepare the
mountain of veg we brought home and when we did a mental tot up of what we’d
spent, we were a little surprised. So, we’ve resolved that next time we go,
we’ll set a budget to spend and having done that, leave. I wonder if we’ll
manage to stick to it? And as an aside, if you haven’t the energy to tackle the
roadworks on the N3 and zoom up to Karkloof, we’re so lucky to have the
wonderful outdoors Farmers’ Market at the Bot Gardens which also has so much to
offer. We go there often for its convenience. Let’s try to give the small guys
a chance and ditch supermarkets once in a while? There really are beautiful benefits to living where we do.
We just have to get up on time and not be offended by sailor language over
breakfast. Luckily, I’m not. It added a Fawlty Towers-like charm to the whole
experience. And that’s what farmers’ markets are all about aren’t they? The
experience of it all. Soil under the fingernails of the person serving you. The
strange-shaped organic veg and the mish-mash of reused glass bottles many of
the preserves are packed into. It’s quaint, it’s sometimes questionable, but I
&^%$ love it! 