A consortium of private landlords accommodating students in the Scottsville area have cried foul after the University of KwaZulu-Natal acquired a new residence that can house 233 students. Landlords say they were “used and discarded” by UKZN. The landlords, who accommodated about 200 students at outsourced residences, say they have found themselves out of business after the university recalled all first-year students from privately owned accommodation. They claimed they were not consulted by the university. As they converged at UKZN last week to demand answers, the landlords told The Witness they were not given a definite answer on why a decision had been taken to recall the students from their residences. They said while they already had standard lease agreements with students, last week the university’s housing department said it had taken a decision to move the students to a residence it had recently acquired. The lease agreement was from February 1 to November 30. “Some of these students arrived here as early as January 15 and we accommodate them,” said one landlord who asked to remain unnamed. “The university didn’t have any accommodation and these students were referred to us. All of a sudden now the university has the accommodation.” Another landlord, who also asked to remain unnamed for fear of victimisation, said the university’s housing department refused to give the students the forms required for their accommodation to be funded by the National Student Financial Aid Scheme (NSFAS). The aggrieved landlords said the university’s decision will cause them to fall behind on wages and bond payments. “We have to pay bonds and electricity. We have had these students from January and some of them have left without paying any rent. Where do they think the students were staying all this time? “They [the housing department officials] say their policy is to fill up their residences first, but the issue is when the students came, they were referred to us. How on Earth did they start with us initially to provide accommodation?” said another landlord. The students were paying between R2 000 to R2 400 per bed per month for private accommodation. “When the university came to inspect our properties, we were told we can only accommodate two students per room, regardless of the size of the room. The place they have moved into now is three students per room,” interjected another landlord. “Two years ago, the university was begging us to house the students and now they’ve just discarded us. This is a total disregard for small businesses,” the landlord added. Concerned students who spoke to The Witness on Sunday said they felt like they were being “held ransom” by the university. “The environment at the new residence is not conducive. How do you expect three people to share a single room? There is only one study desk and we can’t all share it. My room also has cockroaches,” said one student. The newly-acquired residence is in Alan Paton Avenue and previously housed Durban University of Technology students. Another student said he had already paid a R2 500 deposit at the private residence. “It’s all gone down the drain,” said the student. UKZN, however, said that it did not recall first-year students from private landlords. The university said students are placed in on-site or leased residences, and those who are not placed may seek private accommodation, which UKZN does not pay for. UKZN said that for NSFAS to fund a student’s private accommodation, the student must furnish NSFAS with a signed form from the university which says there is no university accommodation available. The university said the new residence in Alan Paton Avenue has 233 beds and students are being encouraged to view the rooms before agreeing to stay there. There are currently 139 spaces left available for all students across all residences in Pietermaritzburg.