Msunduzi's new city boss has been announced. Seasoned local government official and former councillor, Madoda Khathide, is leaving Ladysmith’s Alfred Duma Municipality to head the capital city. On Thursday, Mayor Mzimkhulu Thebolla shared the news that council had approved the appointment of Khathide and now sought the endorsement of the MEC for Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs (Cogta) Sipho Hlomuka to seal the deal so that he could assume office on April 1. “The council have every confidence in Mr Khathide’s capabilities and we are looking forward to working with him to provide stability, fast track service delivery, stimulate job creation and stop corruption,” Thebolla said in a statement. Khathide holds several qualifications, including a masters in business administration in leadership. He previously served as the municipal manager for eDumbe local municipality in Paulpietersburg. The recruitment process for the city manager started last year, following the resignation of Sizwe Hadebe in August. Hadebe accepted a settlement offer from council as part of the deal to terminate the disciplinary action against him. The IFP, ACDP and DA said they could not own the outcome of the recruitment process as opposition parties were excluded from the panel. They said this “lack of transparency” deprived them of the opportunity to put the candidates through their paces and listen to Khathide’s vision to deal with the mix of poor management, maladministration and corruption that has plagued Msunduzi. Caucus leader for the DA, Sibongiseni Majola, said past selections that were done behind closed doors ended with a predetermined outcome, which led Msunduzi to the crisis it is currently facing. He said he had no confidence in Khathide’s abilities because his previous experience was not with any big municipalities with the financial muscle and challenges faced by Msunduzi. “Msunduzi is looking for a hero to rescue it, not someone who is a risk and we hope Mr Khathide is not the latter. We want a bold municipal manager, someone who can stamp authority and stand up to attempts of political interference in recruitment and supply chain management processes,” said Majola. The IFP’s Thinasonke Ntombela said he hoped Khathide was ready for the big league as he moves from a 16-member council to Msunduzi, which has 78 councillors and a budget the size of a metro, at R5,6 billion. “Not that we doubt his credentials but we don’t believe he has the capacity to deal with the crisis that plunged Msunduzi into the administration that we are currently under. We hope that he proves us wrong, for the sake of the people of Msunduzi. “We actually wanted the city to bring back the former municipal manager, Mxolisi Nkosi, because we believe that only someone of his calibre can get this municipality to be financially stable again.” The ACDP’s Rienus Niemand said the stability that would be brought about by having a suitable person officially appointed will have a positive effect on the municipality’s turnaround strategy and he hoped Khathide was the man for the job. “The task ahead is indeed a mammoth task. A city that has been brought to its knees by an inept, incompetent, fractured and dysfunctional governing party and those who co-operated with them in the administration has to be turned around and brought out of being under administration,” said Niemand. Melanie Veness, chief executive officer of the Pietermaritzburg and Midlands Chamber of Business, said they hoped Khathide is bold enough to stand up to the political pressures and is up to the enormous task of turning a municipality of the size of Msunduzi around. “We don’t know much about him, save that he comes from a significantly smaller municipality and the only article that we could source online is unfortunately a negative one, so let’s just say that we are cautiously optimistic.” 