On October 2, 2019, a few weeks after I had been entrusted with the responsibility of leading Msunduzi Municipality, I visited the offices of The Witness. That particular visit was one of many which I initiated and paid to businesses and civil-society formations in a bid to forge a social compact with all our social partners. Such a social compact, I believe, was an important first step in our journey of confronting various challenges relating to service delivery, governance and revenue in the city. The visit to 45 Willowton Road (The Witness offices) was a necessary one for a number of reasons. Firstly, the newspaper has, for more than 170 years, been an integral part of the life of the city and is thus a trusted primary source of news. Secondly, to many of its readers the paper is an authoritative voice and therefore an influencer on many matters. It was with this in mind that I initiated and undertook the visit to the newspaper, to articulate clearly our plan to pull the city out of the doldrums. As part of the leadership collective brought in to steady the Msunduzi ship, I knew that our task was going to be a tough one. We appreciated that our efforts were likely to be met with disdain, cynicism and even resistance from some who profited from the decline and chaos. Nothing could have prepared us, though, for the alarmist posture adopted by the Weekend Witness in an article published earlier this month under a screaming headline: “Broken city”. Also read: Broken city While the author Stephanie Saville, who is the deputy editor of this esteemed paper, raises a number of valid concerns regarding service delivery, I am concerned about the alarmist undertones. Despite her assurances in the piece that she is not trying to be alarmist, the piece can best be described as nothing more than secular doomsday prophecy akin to the Y2K threats at the turn of the century. Throughout the piece, the writer expresses various opinions on matters of service delivery and comes to one conclusion, that the end is upon us and nothing is being done about it. If we are to believe the writer, our city is fast approaching an apocalypse where services will grind to a halt. We are told that tarred roads in suburbs will be reduced to gravel and that many residents may soon flee en masse to other cities, while those who remain behind will contemplate a rates boycott. All this is based on the deputy editor’s objective observations and very selective aspects of figures mentioned at council and in social-media comments. I was moved to respond to this article not because I want to try to sugar-coat the serious challenges we face but to offer facts where I think these have been omitted. I will now deal briefly with some of the issues raised. With regards to infrastructure, the writer boldly asserts that we are going backwards and forecasts that suburban roads “will decline to a point where it’s just dirt roads as potholes widen and deepen and the tar roads break down and no one fixes them”. Nothing could be farther from the truth. We are working on fixing and maintaining our road infrastructure and this includes patching potholes. Between December 2019 and January, we have patched more than 1 000 square metres of potholes in areas such as Edendale, Imbali, Ohrtmann Road, Burger Street, Masukwane, Bombay Road, Dr Chota Motala, Jasmine Road, Watsonia, Royston, Mimosa Road and others. Had the writer looked at the Facebook comments more holistically she would have come across some positive ones, including one from Pierre van Rensburg, who on February 4 wrote: “Mr Mayor, I would personally like to thank you and your colleagues for repairing the potholes in Chasedene area today. Keep up the good work, Mr Mayor. If this is a sign of a brighter future for all citizens alike, you have my fullest support, Sir. Again a very well done!!!!!” Back to the article in question, the doomsday fears get more pronounced as the writer expresses her fears that soon the municipality might not be able to honour its commitments, including those to electricity and water suppliers. I can confidently state that the municipality has not, in recent months, missed even one payment. We have been able to honour our monthly payments to Eskom averaging more than R150 million a month and currently there are no overdue payments owed to Eskom. Therefore, trying to establish the basis of these fears becomes as futile as using mud to plug a hole in a leaking bucket. Contrary to what the article suggests, we do have a plan, both long-term and short-term, for many of the challenges we face. For example, with regards to the landfill site, there is a service provider on site to carry out rehabilitation of the site. An amount of R5 million has been allocated for this process. Saville correctly raises an important issue about the threat posed by massive amounts owed to the city. However, she conveniently omits to mention our aggressive measures to recoup funds owed to the city. These measures include the appointment of 24 debt collectors. The Witness reported on this last month and therefore, given the position the writer holds in the newspaper, it is safe to assume that she was aware of this fact. Yes, the city is facing its fair share of challenges but they are not insurmountable and we are far away from midnight. With the help of national and provincial government, we are doing all we can to arrest and reverse the decline. As a parting shot, we accept your challenge that we must communicate more. To this end, I commit to report regularly to the readers, using this very platform, on the progress we are making. I will be unpacking some of these successes in detail over the coming weeks. And no, our city is not broken beyond repair, it is under reconstruction. 