Companies are downsizing and people are being retrenched.
Unemployment is rife, jobs are getting scarcer by the minute and crime is
rampant. To add to this, the cost of living is getting higher, from
staple foods to petrol and school fees, and the list goes on and on. Many people find the situation is quite depressing. And in
this country, as many as one in six people suffer from anxiety, depression or
substance-use problems, according to statistics released by the South African
Depression and Anxiety Group (Sadag), last year. Speaking to Weekend Witness about depression, psychologist
Kevin Fourie said there is no doubt that there is an increase in depression and
anxiety in South Africa. “It’s not just the economic situation; the unemployment rate
is increasing, people are not able to find work. Crime is an added issue and so
is the Eskom load shedding. Any number of these factors would act as a trigger
for anxiety and depression,” he said. Depression can differ in children, adolescents and adults. For adults, it may be that the world looks hopeless, things
are bad and not going to get better, and there is a loss of motivation. Also,
nothing is nice anymore and nothing seems to interest a depressed person.
Fourie added that depressed people often avoid doing things and lack energy. There is a big difference between depression and sadness, he
clarified. Being sad is linked to something specific and the person can be
lifted out of it. “Depression is a more profound state than sadness,” he said. Most depressed people have difficulty sleeping, while some
sleep too much. It can also lead to people not eating much, or indulging in
comfort food. The first step in dealing with depression is to acknowledge
that you are not well. Some people can control their thoughts and pull
themselves out of depression, said Fourie. There are two routes that people suffering from depression
can take: medication and therapy. Ideally they should choose both, he said. Although suicidal thoughts are common in depression, said
Fourie, not every depressed person will end their lives. Sadag operations director Cassey Chambers said the group has
noticed an increase in the number of calls they are receiving. She concurred
with Fourie, saying that the tough economic situation is definitely a
contributing factor as people are dealing with debt, financial strain, poverty
and unemployment. “All of these can either contribute to making someone feel
stress or depressed, or make their mental health even worse,” she said. Chambers added that depression doesn’t have working hours.
If someone has depression it affects their home life, their work life and
everything else in their life. “Depression affects concentrating, multi-tasking, the
ability to make decisions, etc.,” she said. This makes working very difficult. “We know that many work environments are very stressful, the
demands on individuals have increased, the deadlines have become tighter, and
people are overwhelmed with stress, anxiety and burnout,” she said. Chambers
added that all this can lead to depression and if left untreated or
undiagnosed, the person depressed is at risk for suicide. “We get many calls everyday from people who are at work and
who feel depressed, stressed and so overwhelmed by anxiety that they cannot
function at work or at home.” Today, where work has become more stressful, the pressure to
perform, the worry of keeping your job, discrimination within the workplace,
bullying, working conditions, etc., all contribute, said Chambers. Help for those with depression Trying to deal with your pain on your own can only make it
worse. Share your feelings with others rather than keeping them to yourself. Although you may want to be alone, you may feel better if
you try to take part in some activities you previously enjoyed with your family
and friends. Set yourself a daily routine and try as much as possible to
maintain that routine. You may not be able to do all your usual activities, so be
sure to set a routine that is realistic. Learn to make small goals that you can reach. Once you have
reached them, say positive things to make yourself feel good about your
achievement. Do not say bad things about your efforts. Avoid making big decisions, such as changing jobs or ending
a relationship, until you are feeling better. Change your lifestyle: most people suffering from depression
have been found to be perfectionists and drive themselves much too hard. You may need to learn to lower impossible standards. Try to
reduce your workload in order to live your life at a slower pace. Exercise: Depression often makes you feel tired and without
motivation. Despite this, any form of physical exercise, however small, will be
good for you. If some exercise can be taken in the fresh air, this can add
to the benefit. Go for a walk or play soccer with your friends. Diet is important. Under or over eating is a symptom of
depression. It is essential to have a well-balanced diet that prevents
tiredness and feeling run down. Relaxation: You may get angry and irritated easily.
Relaxation techniques such as running, reading, sewing, playing soccer,
watching TV or reading, etc. are all effective ways of removing anxiety and
stress when you are depressed. Read books: Learning about and understanding the nature of
the condition and its possible causes will help to remove much of the fear,
guilt and misconception which many people have. Get a broader picture by reading as many books as possible.
Give them to relatives and friends to read. This will help them understand the
illness. Avoid habits like smoking, drinking or taking drugs. Alcohol
in particular is a depressant and it can make you feel better in the beginning,
but afterwards you will feel worse. Join a support group. A support group is the first place you
can go where everyone understands and no one judges. Knowing that someone else
truly understands by having “been there” brings a sense of relief. Remember: Seeking treatment is a sign of strength, and is
the first step to feeling better. Don’t expect too much from yourself right away. Feeling
better takes time. Don’t expect too much. It will take time to get you feeling
better. — Information supplied by SADAG. 