From braving icy waters, to staring down the edge of cliffs,
and performing daring rescues from helicopters, members from Pietermaritzburg’s
police search and rescue unit have seen it all. The unit, which was out in full force at the Midmar Mile
this weekend, has made headlines several times for pulling off heroic rescues
or near-impossible body excavations. Weekend Witness spoke to members of the unit to get an
insight into how they cope with the fear and trauma that comes with their line
of work and, most importantly, what drives them to do a job that most people
would never consider. Team members said the job comes with a lot of personal
sacrifice, like family time, but said they are fuelled by passion and the
satisfaction that comes with pulling off a successful rescue. Warrant Officer Fred Brand, who has served on the unit for
about a decade, said it was difficult to articulate what goes through members’
minds before a rescue. “So much goes through your mind like, ‘why am I doing
this when I could be at a braai with my family’. But fear is good because it
keeps you safe. “We always say that if someone is about to do a rescue and
they’re not scared, then they must move off and let the next person do it,
because that’s when you make stupid mistakes. It’s also about knowing your
team-mates have your back and trusting them. “It’s also about ensuring you prepare your equipment,”
Sergeant Nolan Wallace said. “We train for a lot longer than other units
because safety is such a big part of our job.” Constable Jesse Maré said rescues would be impossible
without teamwork. “The people we work with are hard workers, and sometimes when
you feel tired, seeing them push that extra bit lifts you up. “We have to have complete faith in the team and our systems
and that helps us manage the fear.”  Members of the search and rescue team at a rescue at Howick Falls. Search and rescue veteran Warrant Officer Karl Gouws said
intense training was essential for their job. “We need to be mentally and
physically well-trained. When you get to a scene, you have a split second to
make a decision on what to do. “This is where the training kicks in and it’s almost like
you’re a robot and are able to make quick decisions. We also know each others’
strengths and weaknesses and that helps.” But officers said the job also came with some degree of
mental anguish, and it was often difficult for outside people to relate to what
they go through. “It’s hard to discuss what we go through, even with
psychologists. So we speak to each other about it because we’re all in the same
boat,” Maré said. Brand said sometimes officers went home agitated or
emotional after intense operations, and a solid family support structure was
important. “Sometimes we wonder whether we could have got to a scene
faster and saved a life and that’s very tough. Sometimes we get very emotional
at scenes and sometimes we cry.” Maré added: “Hearing a mother howling when we find the body
of her child is one of the worst things. I just want to get away from the scene
as fast as possible when that happens. We’re all parents and we know what that
mother is going through. “We miss a lot of birthdays and anniversaries and things
like that. The job comes with a lot of sacrifice, and you have to make your
family understand that this comes with the job.”  Warrant Officer Karl Gouws holds rescue dog Chazz, joined by Warrant Officer Fred Brand and Constable Jesse Maré. Wallace said: “We also say that, as much as the job may be
difficult, if you’re using counselling services after every rescue then maybe
it’s not for you. That’s because the other side of the coin is that we’re able
to help people get closure when we find bodies.” Maré added: “That’s the main thing that drives us. About 99%
of the time we are recovering bodies but that one percent when we rescue a
person still alive reaffirms that this is our calling in life. Nothing beats
that feeling.” Brand said: “It’s not a job where you can get rich, it’s
about having that passion to serve your country. We are able to provide closure
for families when a loved one goes missing.” Gouws said: “It’s 100% about having passion. If you don’t,
you won’t last long in this job. It’s also about having compassion and knowing
what families go through when we make rescues.” The unit also commended their seniors and the province for
always providing necessary support.