Pietermaritzburg-born playwright and actor Clinton Marius has died, following emergency heart surgery at Groote Schuur Hospital in Cape Town on Wednesday. William Charlton-Perkins, his partner at Copydog Productions, said he was devastated by Marius’ death, adding: “He filled our lives with joy and laughter. He was one of the most creative people I knew. He had so many story ideas he was working on.” Riaan Timson, the company’s marketing manager, added: “The world lost a giant today. William and I lost what we hold most dear in the world ...” Meanwhile, Marius’ mother, Trudy van Nie­kerk, said the world was “a worse place” without her son, adding: “My love for him was unending and unconditional”. Born on August 20, 1966, Marius (53) attended Merchiston Preparatory, Alexandra High and then, following a stint in the South African army, he enrolled to study at the University of Natal in Pietermaritzburg. In an interview with The Witness, Marius had said he had wanted be a writer since he was eight years old, and still had the naive little poems and short stories he wrote at that age. It was the start of a distinguished career, during which he penned the long-running Lotus FM series Lollipop Lane, as well as the award-winning and critically acclaimed plays iPuppeti, The Calf With No Name, The Fantastical Flea Circus, White Christmas and B!*ch Stole My Doek.   Pietermaritzburg-born playwright and actor, Clinton Marius, pictured here with two of actors who have appeared in his play, ‘The Fantastical Flea Circus’, Shika Budhoo and Dhaveshan Govender.  Marius made his stage debut singing the lead role in Menotti’s opera Amahl and the Night Visitors at the age of 12. Later, he appeared in David Campton’s Mutatis Mutandis, The Divine Child, the successful one-man show Uncut – The Penis Monologues, directed by Garth Anderson, and Vergissmeinnicht (Farm of Secrets) in Grahamstown. Away from the stage, Marius wrote the novella Sunshine – The Booklet of the Biography, and turned his play The Calf With No Name into a recommended book for Grade 8 pupils. Marius, Charlton-Perkins and Timson had recently relocated from Durban to Knysna where they had started a new theatre project to give artists in the area a platform to perform.