What is the scariest thing your child could be addicted to? Alcohol, drugs? Think again. There is a new game that can be fatal, and your child could
be playing it. The “Skull-Breaker” or “Tripping Jump” challenge has gone viral
after initially emerging on video-sharing social networking app TikTok. The challenge originated in Spain. And now Vee Gani, chairperson of the KZN Parents
Association, fears that the challenge has crept into local schools. “Having
come into our schools means that our children are going to try to perform those
acts unsuspectingly on their colleagues who don’t know about it.” He implored local pupils not to attempt to do the challenge. Over the past few days, videos have been doing the rounds
showing one person jumping, to be tripped by two people standing on either side
of them. The willing victim then falls flat on their back. A quick Google search revealed a number of reports worldwide
in which children have been injured and ended up in hospital. The number of
unreported incidents is unknown. This week, the SAPS
warned children on its Facebook page against copying this dangerous fad after a
video of the challenge emerged in Pretoria. “With so many social media
applications out there at the touch of a screen, you may not realise all the
potential dangers of social media facing your children. “By teaching children about Internet safety, being aware of
their online habits and guiding them to appropriate websites, parents can make
sure that their children become safe and responsible users on social-networking
websites,” the SAPS said. In the video, which has been posted on YouTube, three young
boys from Pretoria are seen laughing as they complete the challenge. Parents have been warned that the challenge could lead to
massive head trauma and other injuries. Dr Sudhir Dookie from Gateway Busamed
Private Hospital, who is a neurosurgeon, said that parents should seek medical
attention if their child receives a blow to the head. “It is always advisable
to err on the side of caution, particularly when it comes to head injuries,” he
said. “It is vital that a medical professional assesses the child
to determine whether there are no symptoms of concussion at all, a possible
concussion, or something even more serious like a broken bone in the skull, a
bruised brain or a bleed in or around the brain. “My advice to parents is to contact your doctor and have a
medical professional assess your child as soon as possible if you are at all
concerned about a head injury that your child has sustained. “It is also important for parents to receive information on
how to further manage a head injury, such as a concussion, at home, to prevent
potential long-term consequences,” he said. KZN Education spokesperson Muzi Mahlambi has issued a
warning to pupils not to follow the trend, cautioning that they could end up
with severe brain damage or even die. Clinical psychologist Clive Willows said: “A feature of peer
pressure is that vulnerable teenagers without mature, independent thought,
suspend their judgment and knowledge in pursuit of emotional needs for
acceptance. “Rather than consideration of the consequences to determine
their choices, they are driven by a fear of disapproval or rejection.” He said bizarre and dangerous activities will flourish as
long as there is a lack of guidance and restraint from those who are older, who
should know better and should be able to provide alternative routes towards
maturity. “Social media provides a powerful and ever-present medium to
which they trade in their identity and perceived social status,” Willows added. Rianette Leibowitz, founder of Cyber Safety Change Agent,
cautioned parents to take an interest in their children’s lives online, find
out more about what they are browsing, and talk to them from a position of
coaching and mentoring. “If your children are on any apps, always ensure that the
right age restriction is being adhered to,” Liebowitz said. In an era of social media, she said people are motivated by
“the number of likes they get, to get the video viral”. “We need to teach kids that before they copy these
challenges, they need to think about it first, consider the danger to
themselves and to other people in the video and the ripple effects it will
cause.”