Msunduzi’s waste department is littered with problems that have resulted in the municipality not being able to guarantee timeous refuse collection around the city. This has contributed to a spike in illegal dumping, with sites mushrooming even in the city centre. This admission was made by community services officials when they appeared before the council watchdog — the municipal public accounts committee (Mpac) on Tuesday. They were responding to councillors’ questions on the waste department’s service delivery shortcomings, including “erratic” refuse collection and the lack of bylaw enforcement. The community services business unit, which was led by the acting general manager, Mbongeni Mathe, highlighted the high vacancy rate, demotivated staff, poor fleet management, budget constraints, poor maintenance of equipment and lack of synergy within departments as some of their challenges. Acting waste manager Sipho Dubazana said there were several critical posts that were vacant, even those that could be considered junior. He said the situation had got progressively worse since the 2018/19 financial year as there were also several people on suspension. However, he said the process was under way to fill some of the senior positions, including that of the waste manager. Dubazana said the department was also grossly under funded and that compromised the quality of the service it was able to render. “We are still falling short in a number of areas. Like for instance you’ve got an area called France, I think it’s in Ward 13, we are unable to collect there. “And even those areas that are demarcated as areas where we are supposed to be collecting, we are unable to collect on time because of the shortage of fleet and other internal challenges,” said Mathe on whether the City was still able to carry out its refuse collection function. He said they were working on a plan to resolve the challenges so that they could stick to the collection timetable. This includes the licensing of the fleet and fixing the trucks that were currently away for repair, which he anticipated to be back on rotation over the next two weeks. Councillor Jabu Ngubo said the waste department should be one of Msunduzi’s key priorities, even when it comes to adequate budget allocation. She said there was also an indication of failings in the supervision of the employees because there was no will to do so. She said there were complaints that sometimes the refuse bags were picked up at night or not at all and that was unfair to the residents. “When you are erratic in the area that you should be servicing, the people with cars go to places like Vulindlela and dump there. When you see illegal dumping sites in Vulindlela, it’s not people from there that are doing it, it’s those from the areas where you should be collecting and you are not,” said Ngubo. Councillor Manqoba Ngubo said illegal dumping was escalating even in the CBD as some residents could or would not take their waste to the landfill site so they just used any vacant space they could find. Ngubo also blamed the lack of bylaw enforcement, saying the City was shooting itself in the foot in that regard. “What is blatantly clear is that we don’t have law enforcement. People can transgress and they know that they’re going to get away with it … We will never win this battle until we tighten on law enforcement.” He said all the cleaning campaigns that Msunduzi has been embarking on would never yield sustainable results until they were paired with enforcement. When Councillor Nkosinathi Gambu asked why skip bins were not provided to curb illegal dumping, he was told that the City did not have enough of them. Dubazana said even the 24 that it had were old and mostly beyond repair. He said the waste department recently engaged Safe City to use its cameras to help catch illegal dumpers. However, he said, the challenge with enforcement was that the maximum fine for transgressions was a meagre R1 000 and that did very little to deter people. Mathe said the department would also be requesting assistance, in the form of funding and resources, from the provincial government to mitigate financial constraints because illegal dumping was “a moving target”, and to fund other waste management programmes. The meeting also agreed on the revival of the “Keep Pietermaritzburg Clean” programme, which could assist in educating communities about waste management, including illegal dumping and even recycling.