A rare work in crayon on paper by renowned sculptor Anton van Wouw was among the works brought to the valuation day at the Tatham Art Gallery in Pietermaritz­burg. The tiny seascape is owned by André van der Hoven, the great-granddaughter of the Dutch-born artist, considered by many to be the father of South African sculpture. Most of his bronzes were cast at the Nisini and Massa foundries in Rome. They include a statue of Paul Kruger, which was sold last year by Strauss & Co for R10,47 million. Van der Hoven’s historically unique work delighted senior art specialist Dr Alastair Meredith, who told her that while he knew of several paintings by the artist, he had never seen a work on paper by Van Wouw before. “I never knew my great-grandfather. He died in 1945, before I was born,” Van der Hoven said, adding that the work would be staying in the family. Two works by English-born painter Robert Gwelo Goodman were also brought into the Antiques Roadshow-style event, held in the Lorna Ferguson room at the gallery in Chief Albert Luthuli Street on Tuesday. Susie Goodman, Strauss & Co’s executive director, said Still Life with Aloes would be going on auction with a reserve price of between R70 000 and R100 000, with a Drakensberg landscape titled Mont-Aux-Sources set to go under the hammer with an estimate of R120 000 to R160 000. Maritzburg artist Jinny Heath brought in a beautiful painting, Reclining Nude, created by her mother, Jane, in the mid-fifties. Jack, Jane and Jinny Heath all taught at the Centre for Visual Arts at the University of KwaZulu-Natal, Pietermaritzburg. Speaking about the striking work, Jinny said that her mother had always stressed the importance of treating artists’ models well, something she took on board when she was a lecturer. Other finds discovered at the valuation day included: • a Leonora Everard-Haden pastel on paper depicting the interior of her home in Thornhurst Drive, Pietermaritzburg; • a fish platter made by late Maritzburg ceramic artist Juliet Armstrong; and • and a pottery vessel made by Lephina Molefe, one of the founding members of the ceramics studio at the Evangelical Lutheran Church Art and Craft Centre at Rorke’s Drift. Established in 1962, Rorke’s Drift had a significant impact on the development of South African art and craft in the 1960s and 1970s. Goodman said that, as usual, their visit to the Tatham Art Gallery had been “enormous fun” and that she and her team had enjoyed examining the scores of items brought in by the public.