A University of KwaZulu-Natal student who shot dead a candidate attorney outside the Saki bar and restaurant in Victoria Centre, has been sentenced to 25 years’ imprisonment by the Pietermaritzburg high court. Kwanda Ncala (22), a final-year student who was studying towards a degree in Government Business and Ethics, pleaded guilty in terms of a plea agreement. He admitted that he murdered Mluleki Msomi, a candidate attorney, who also tutored at the university, so that he could steal his vehicle. A 17-year-old, who was also charged in connection with the murder, only pleaded guilty to theft and his sentencing was postponed for five years. He has been ordered to appear before the court during that time if called upon to do so. The teenager admitted that he stole his grandfather’s firearm from his safe, which was later used to commit the murder. The Grade 11 pupil said he took the firearm “in an attempt to gain recognition from the older group of boys”. The state accepted he had nothing to do with the actual killing. Also, Ncala did not implicate him in the murder and the state had no evidence to pursue a murder charge against him. Ncala said in the plea agreement that on September 14, he decided to accompany some of his friends on a night out to Durban where they planned to enjoy some drinks. When the group left, the teenager was in possession of his grandfather’s firearm. That evening they consumed alcohol and drugs such as cocaine and dagga. Ncala also consumed codeine. When they returned to Pietermaritzburg they decided to have some drinks at Saki, so they went there. Ncala said he took possession of the firearm from the teenager. The teenager then went back to the vehicle to look for something. Ncala, meanwhile, noticed a white Toyota double-cab in the parking area. He said he became “tempted” to rob the driver, Msomi, of his vehicle because the driver appeared to be under the influence of liquor. The driver’s door was not shut. Ncala took out the firearm and pointed it at Msomi demanding that he hand over the vehicle. Msomi apparently surprised him and reached out at Ncala to grab the firearm. Ncala fired a shot, which hit Msomi in his chest. Ncala then pulled him out of the vehicle and got inside. He signalled the teenager to join him. He then dropped off the teenager. Ncala drove to the UKZN campus where he pretended to study. He was arrested there during the early hours of the morning.