“She just has to dress up nicely this evening and come with an empty stomach and a big appetite!” These are the words of romantic Emafini Nobaza, who was beaming next to his girlfriend, Leza Duntsu. Nobaza told The Witness on Thursday that he has made a dinner reservation for Friday evening; and plans to wine and dine his special lady. He said that he did not believe in surprises, and he also wasn’t very good at pulling them off. Duntsu said that as a couple, they don’t get each other gifts on Valentine’s Day — they just make sure that they spend it together. Nobaza put on a sly smile and interrupted his girlfriend, Duntsu, and said: “I think I heard her saying something about getting me a full tank of petrol, and new car tyres!” Duntsu rolled her eyes and laughed at her lover’s obvious hint. Meanwhile, Lenet Brown laughingly told The Witness she is currently “fighting” with her husband so she wasn’t looking forward to Valentine’s Day. In an attempt to lighten her mood, The Witness asked Brown to think back to the best Valentine’s Day gift that her husband ever got for her. Smiling shyly, she recalled that her partner had prepared a candlelit dinner for her six years ago. She said that he cooked a delicious chicken dish, and that the whole evening was well thought out. “Of course, this happened when our children were still very young,” said Brown. The Witness asked Brown to share what the worst gift her husband had ever gotten her was. “I’ve never had a bad experience, but today might just be the day!” laughed Brown. A flustered Divash Ashokumar told The Witness on on Thursday that he had no idea what he would be doing for Valentine’s Day. “I am working on it!” he said, frantically. Ashokumar said that he wasn’t too bothered about what his girlfriend of three years would get for him. “I just hope she gets me something, anything!” he said. Kayleen Walters said she doesn’t celebrate Valentine’s Day because it falls on the same day as her boyfriend’s birthday, whom she has been with for five years. “Fortunately, I have never really been into Valentine’s Day anyway,” shrugged Walters. On the other hand, Zasembo Mkhize was excited to share that she would be celebrating her first Valentine’s Day ever, this year. “I have been single every other year, so this should be fun,” said Mkhize. Mkhize said that her boyfriend had planned a weekend away to Zimbali. But she had no idea yet what she was going to get him. “What do men even want? Are socks fine?” she laughed.