Pietermaritzburg police believe they may have cracked a
syndicate said to have generated hundreds of thousands of rands from lonely,
unsuspecting women leaving them out of pocket and broken-hearted. The criminals had allegedly been involved in a romance scam
that netted them hundreds of thousands of rands before disappearing without a
trace. Captain Kholeka Mhlongo, Alexandra police station
spokesperson, said in January a man was arrested following extensive police
investigations. He is due back in court early next week. Mhlongo warned women, especially government employees, to be
alert of opportunistic criminals promising they can multiply people’s money and
make them millionaires. She said some victims of this scam have gone as far as to
resign from their work and take all their money to these con artists. Speaking out, a Howick woman said she wanted to warn others
not to part with their money. What was supposed to be a fairytale, turned out to be a
nightmare for the mother-of-two, after she was scammed of over R257 000. The woman in her forties, Thandi* (not her real name), who
is a government employee, became a target. She met the man, who said he was a veterinarian and
traditional healer, in the CBD last October. The pair exchanged numbers and
soon developed a relationship. A few weeks later, the man told Thandi that he
had intentions of paying lobola for her. Immediately after the proposal, the man asked if he could
introduce Thandi to his ancestors before proceeding to send a delegation to her
family for the lobola negotiations. The man took Thandi to a block of flats in Hayfields, where
he operated as a traditional healer in a “dark room” with a sponge, a candle
and a grass hat. “He made contact with the ancestors and we started talking
to them.” She said the voices of the ancestors came from the grass
hat. “The ancestors asked if I was employed, where I was employed and how much
I earned.” She said the “ancestors” told her they could see she was
experiencing financial problems and needed a cleansing. The cleansing would cost R2 500. Subsequent to the cleansing, Thandi was told she would
receive a “gift” of R12 million to help them start their new life together. A few days after the cleansing, the woman went back to the
dark room to check if she had been cleansed of bad luck. After a small ritual and prayer over a small box, they
opened their eyes and the box had suddenly been filled with cash “with a note
from the ancestors informing me the money was mine”. “Then the ancestors asked me to open a bank account and take
out a loan to avoid possible questions from police about where the lump sum
came from. After applying for the loan, the ancestors said they would deposit
cash into my account,” she told Weekend Witness. Finally, the woman hesitantly took out two loans, one for
R97 000 and the other for R160 000 from different banks. After applying for the two loans, she received further
instructions to withdraw the money and give it to her boyfriend for the
ancestors, so they could pray for it before depositing it into her account. A few days later, the man told her he was going to Cape Town
on a business trip. In the days that followed, Thandi received a string of
SMSes, one which was seen by Weekend Witness, alerting her that over R4 million
had been deposited into her bank account. “I sought a bank statement and discovered that nothing had
been deposited into the account and that the SMSes were fraudulent.” Thandi reported the matter to the police who opened a case
of fraud. She said she was shocked when the police told her that many other
government employees had fallen into the same trap. “He was just so charming. It was like he used something on
me, and I couldn’t think clearly.” “I don’t even know how I’m going to pay back the loans. I
earn R10 000 a month ... how will I manage?” she said. In 2018, The Witness reported that at least three
Pietermaritzburg women had fallen prey to smooth-talking men who stole their
savings before disappearing, leaving the women destitute. Using similar modus operandi, the men lure women, mostly
government employees, into a relationship, before persuading them to quit their
jobs and withdraw their life savings. Once the men get the money, they
disappear. In 2017, a former nurse said in an interview with Weekend
Witness that not only did the flashy former “man of her dreams” steal her new
Maserati sports car, but he also took off with R400 000 cash. She said he told
her that he was a businessman and a prophet from Jamaica, but she later
discovered he was from Uganda. After dating for a few months, she said the man
persuaded her to resign and she received a R1,3 million lump sum. He then asked her to deposit R750 000 with a car dealership
in Benoni to buy a Maserati. The man vanished with her car and the cash she said he
convinced her to withdraw by suggesting her estranged husband might claim the
money. How criminals use psychology A local psychologist said that some of the reasons why
people fall for scams are fear and self-gain. He said the fear of losing an
opportunity is what pushes them most into responding to the scam. “Scams are effective because they touch people’s feelings
and emotions,” said the psychologist. “It is easy for people to comply when they are told they
will benefit easily with little effort, more especially if it’s for financial gain,”
he said. He said criminals deliberately seek out vulnerable
individuals. “They use psychology and play on an individual’s weaknesses
and needs,” he said.    