Msunduzi had to surrender more than R15,4 million of the municipal infrastructure grant (MIG) to the national Treasury after the City failed to spend it on the road upgrades it was earmarked for. On Wednesday, acting chief financial officer Dudu Ndlovu-Gambu said Treasury took the funds from Msunduzi’s December allocation of the equitable share. More than R7,6 million of the money was meant for the rehabilitation of a road in Vulindlela’s Ward 2 while R7,8 million was for the upgrade of the gravel road in Harewood in Ward 20. In her motivation for the request of the rollover, acting City manager Nelisiwe Ngcobo said these were both multi-year projects with contractors on site. According to a report presented by Ndlovu-Gambu on Wednesday, the funds could not be spent before the end of the financial year, in June 2019, because purchase requisitions were not being created on time as well as delays in the design handover by the consultants, which resulted in the contractor being unable to proceed with work. The project management unit also blamed the underspending on the rejection of the R1,4 million salary expenditure by the provincial Department of Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs. Members of the financial services portfolio committee called for heads to roll over the unspent grants. DA caucus leader Sibongiseni Majola said this was an insult to the people of Msunduzi, who were waiting for service delivery. “We are partly grant dependent in this municipality when it comes to funding our capital projects because we can’t raise enough revenue to fund them ourselves. It, therefore, makes no sense why we would not spend money once central government has given it to us. We are denying our own residents service deli­very,” he said. Majola added that Msunduzi should have considered reallocating the funds to other projects as the grant was not conditional. He said the money could have been used to fix several things, including street lights and rehabilitation of roads in other parts of the city. ANC’s Sandile Dlamini said the person responsible for this must be held accountable and the consultants should be liable for the delays on their side. “These people must be punished. We can’t have such an amount not being spent while service delivery is stalled in such fashion ... We’ve got professionals who should be doing their jobs but they are not.” Acting general manager for infrastructure Brenden Sivparsad said the matter had been investigated through the internal audit unit and the responsible official has since resigned. “However, that might not exonerate him based on the outcome of the internal audit investigation. The incumbent that did not account for that R15 million, there are steps being taken.” Sivparsad said the delay in the handover of the designs was due to the change of consultants after their contract with Msunduzi came to an end. The former contractor had to give the designs to the new consultants who had to satisfy themselves with the quality of work before executing them. Dlamini asked that the municipality’s legal department look into recouping the funds lost from the former official, based on the outcome of the internal audit probe. He said this would be a lesson to other officials that this would not be allowed. “This is a tendency by our people, they do wrong things intentionally and then they resign and then everything falls apart. We end up being left dry as government because of individuals who do as they please,” he said.