A pregnant woman is one of three people who have been bitten
by dogs in the past two weeks in Napierville. Angeleque Uzzell (25) intervened to save her five-year-old
daughter from being bitten when the two suddenly found themselves surrounded by
four dogs as Uzzell walked the child to a crèche in the area. Also attacked were Wouter du Preez (67) and his son, Wouter
Jnr, who were both bitten several times in separate incidents. Those attacked
said the dogs, which include a rottweiler, pitbull and boerboel, belong to a
family in the area. Uzzell, who is four months pregnant, said the dogs
surrounded her and her daughter and one dog bit onto the child’s school bag.
Uzzell then lifted her daughter up to get her away from the dogs, but the dogs
ended up attacking her instead. She was bitten on the left upper thigh and leg. She had to get rabies and tetanus shots and a scan to make
sure the baby she was carrying was fine. “I am traumatised and now I walk in
fear. I have to take another, longer route when I take my daughter to crèche. I
love dogs, but now whenever I hear one bark I get scared.” Du Preez Snr told Weekend Witness that he was bitten by the
dogs about two weeks ago. “I drove out of the gate then got out of my bakkie
and the dogs attacked me. I was bitten on my right arm and right hand.” He has been left with deep scars along his right arm. “I
can’t grip and hold things properly. I always see these dogs running outside
and I feel as if I’m trapped in my own house.” He said his son was bitten all over his body and was
hospitalised. “I have to lock my own dogs in my backyard because I’m worried
these dogs will kill my dogs.” When Weekend Witness visited the house where the dogs
allegedly come from yesterday there was nobody home and no sign of the dogs. Police are investigating three separate cases of failure to
confine vicious dogs in a premises. A source said that the owners had indicated
that they would hand over one of the dogs to the SPCA. The SPCA, meanwhile, said it is aware of the situation, but
is unable to act without instructions from a court, police, or the dogs’ owners
themselves. The association said they were not aware of any of those
dogs being handed over to them at this point.