“Please help me. I am dying. Come, quickly.” These are the words that were uttered by the chairperson of Sector 4 community forum, Suneal Beharie, after he was viciously attacked on Friday evening. Beharie’s attorney, Surendra Singh, who spoke to The Witness on his behalf on Monday, described the attack as “brutal and cowardly”. Singh told The Witness his client was attacked on Lahore Road whilst on a personal visit. He said Beharie was standing next to a bakkie when two cars drove past him. He said Beharie saw the same two cars drive back up the road moments later; and before he knew it, he felt a “bash” on his head caused by what appeared to be a baseball bat. He said before Beharie could react, he was brutally attacked by several men who had a bush knife, various steel rods and a baseball bat. Singh said four more vehicles pulled up during the assault, where more men got out and joined in to batter his client. “We are not sure of the exact number of suspects,” he said. Singh told The Witness that he received a text from a woman who could not be named, late on Friday evening, which led to him contacting Beharie. He said he called Beharie, who answered the phone call and said: “Please help me. I am dying. Come, quickly.” “I was in total shock, and immediately went to him,” said Singh. He said Beharie was almost unrecognisable when he arrived at the scene of the attack. The attorney said Beharie was taken to St Anne’s hospital where he was stabilised and had to get several stitches. Singh said that Beharie was then taken to Daymed Private Hospital around 3.30 am on Saturday because he needed to be operated on by an orthopaedic surgeon. Beharie’s wife, Sue, said on Monday the incident was traumatic for her whole family, especially her daughter. “I hate that she saw her father in such a terrible state,” she said. Beharie told The Witness yesterday that he was still in great physical pain. He said the attackers broke his left femur bone and he had some broken ribs. He also had bruises all over his body and had suffered a head injury. “There was swelling in my brain, and they also cut my left thumb with a bush knife,” said Beharie. Mountain Rise police spokesperson Warrant Officer Joshua Maistry confirmed yesterday that Beharie was assaulted on Friday evening. He said Beharie had visibly severe injuries, and he was immediately taken to hospital. Maistry said no arrests have been made, and an assault case had been opened.