The reputation of the University of KwaZulu-Natal could be irreparably damaged if the ongoing violence and disruption on its campuses is not stopped. That’s the view of the UKZN Education Crisis Committee (UKZNECC), which was set up by concerned academics, parents, alumni and some students, in Durban on Saturday. In a statement, the committee — which is being formally represented by the Bishop of the Anglican Diocese of Natal, Bishop Rubin Phillip — said it was deeply concerned about the “deteriorating situation on the university’s campuses where teaching, learning and research has been seriously compromised”. Since the beginning of February, the Pietermaritzburg, Westville and Howard College campuses of the university have been plagued by violence and unrest. Buildings have been torched or badly damaged and for two weeks lectures were suspended as students expressed their anger at being unable to register because of historical debt. Staff members, including Emeritus Professor Erwin Brüning, from the maths department in Westville, also came under attack, prompting the University of KZN Staff Union (Uksu) to down tools and demand reassurance from the university’s management team that it was safe for them to go to work. UKZN has been granted two temporary interdicts in the Pietermaritzburg high court in the past few weeks as it tries to deal with violence and arson on its property. The second order, which was granted last Friday, was against 34 students, and any other people found to be inciting, organising or participating in illegal strike action on its campuses. It also prevents anyone from damaging university property, assaulting or intimidating others and preventing access to UKZN. The university, which currently has around R1,7 billion debt hanging over its head, tried to ease tensions last week by appealing to academic staff to donate research grant money to help it clear its historical student debt. The request was met with anger by academics. Uksu members have also called for the head of human resources, Dr Siphelele Zulu, to be fired, alleging he has failed to deal with staff grievances for the past two years. The union, which represents some 2 000 academic and support staff, also wants UKZN to review salary ranges and conditions, to address unequal workloads and for the “inflexible” Key Performance Assessment (KPA) system to be addressed. The UKZNECC believes the ongoing violence and disruption at the university is putting the 2020 academic year at risk, with entire programmes facing the prospect of losing accreditation. The committee is also concerned that the conduct of the private security company at UKZN may be fuelling tensions and that the university’s existing CCTV cameras are either inadequate or don’t work at all, making it harder to find those responsible for destroying valuable infrastructure. The committee is also critical of the university management team, saying that it “has neglected its legal responsibilities and is dysfunctional” and that it seems unwilling or unable to engage with the students in meaningful dialogue. Other concerns raised include the fact that the detailed financial situation of the university has not been disclosed to the student leadership, that the scale of those affected by arrear fees has not been disclosed to stakeholder communities and that the university’s financial rules may be at odds with NSFAS rules. The UKZNECC believes that unless these issues are resolved UKZN will suffer a decline in research output and see its reputation and that of its students, staff and alumni tarnished. The committee wants the University Council to get staff, student and management together to have a meaningful discussion on the way forward, and that if the university management is unable or unwilling to discharge its responsibilities, it should be released. They also want to stabilise the university’s teaching, learning and research programme, to encourage the university to institute a system of financial counselling for students with fee issues, to register students who have secured funding for 2020 and to harmonise university financial rules with those at NSFAS. Other key demands are for UKZN to be “uncompromising in investigating and prosecuting those responsible for violent behaviour”. They also need to make sure that all campuses have better security equipment to ensure the safety of staff and students and that the SAPS investigate Mi7 for improper conduct. The Witness has reported that 80% of students at UKZN are registered. Registration closes on March 6. Asked to comment on the memorandum issued by the UKZNECC, the management of UKZN said they had not received the document.