Is he brazen, reckless or does he just not care if he’s
caught out? This is the question Weekend Witness reporters wondered when
they stumbled onto photos of a prison inmate posting pictures of himself on
Facebook whilst behind bars and fully clad in prison uniform. Prisoner Mnqobi Khanyile (19), who goes by the name Mnqobrie
Khanyile Ngwane on Facebook, took to his own Facebook page and one called New
Prison to show his Facebook friends what he was up to in jail. The KwaZulu-Natal Department of Correctional Services
confirmed that Khanyile is indeed incarcerated at the Medium A Correctional
Centre in New Prison. He is serving a 10-year sentence for house breaking,
robbery and assault. From February last year, Khanyile has been posting selfies,
pictures with other prisoners and messages about how he finds prison life on
Facebook. Some of his pictures are captioned “just in prison” and “prison is
boring”. Another says: “Everyday and every hour we just smoking weed but one
day we will smoke out of new prison naaah.” One picture shows a man smoking. On March 20, 2019, a post by Khanyile says he is with Bassie
Molefe and Cizwezn Molefe at Westville Prison-Correctional Services. Translated from Zulu to English, another of his posts reads:
“Going to prison helped me because now I know who are the people who were
making a fool of me, enjoying the blood money I got from killing and robbing
but now they can’t even buy me R12 Vodacom airtime. But it’s fine, prison won’t
break me, you will all see shocking things when I come out.”  Screenshots from Mnqobi Khanyile's Facebook page. Some of his Facebook friends comment on his posts, wishing
him well and encouraging him to stay strong whilst in prison. The youngster’s
last post was last Friday. Violence monitor and analyst Mary de Haas was shocked to
learn that an inmate was seen flaunting himself on Facebook. “Prison authorities should be held accountable for this and
explain how this is happening. “If prisoners get uncontrolled communication with people
outside and the Internet, they can easily plot more crimes whilst in prison
using these cell phones.” De Haas said prisoners having cell phones in prison was “a
mockery of our justice system”. “When you go to prison it might be because you raped
someone, murdered, or robbed someone so now imagine the victims stumbling on
the perpetrator flaunting on Facebook. It’s not fair on the victims. “This is bad, but it’s also not a surprise because every
time the prison authorities do raids, they always find cell phones and drugs
inside,” said De Haas. She said in her experience, prisoners were not allowed to
have cell phones and as far as she knew, the only thing that is being contested
was whether prisoners can access computers for study purposes. “I think them having access to computers for study purposes
is better because with computers there are several programmes you can use to
monitor what sites were used and to prevent them from using certain sites. “Imprisonment should be a punishment and it’s no longer a
punishment if inmates have access to the outside world and social media. It’s
pathetic. Prison authorities should be held accountable,” said De Haas. Within hours of learning about Khanyile’s prison posts,
Thulani Mdluli, spokesperson for the Department of Correctional Services (DCS),
said security officials seized two cell phones, a charger and earphones in
Khanyile’s possession. Mdluli said the offender has been internally charged with
possession of an illegal item. He will then appear before the Case Management
Committee (CMC), for further possible judgment against his sentence and
benefits, and an internal investigation will be instituted very soon. He said the security policy of the department is based on
six pillars. “These include personnel security, physical security, information
security, operational security, technology security and management supervision.
Even though we have fundamental strategies to ensure safety and security,
corrections remains a societal responsibility. “As DCS we are ... dealing against these activities by
applying regular surprise searching, follow-up on information received through
tip-offs, visibility of officials and by means of body searching inmates,
proper use of walk-through metal detectors, use of X-ray scanners and, lastly,
use of CCTV cameras, depending on the availability in centres,” explained
Mdluli. He added that the department was calling for a partnership
between them and all constituencies to assist in preparing all inmates for
successful reintegration. “Smuggling behaviour must be stopped, and it begins
with us, in order for us to achieve sensible restorative justice,” he said.