Msunduzi's fire station recently received a much-needed facelift thanks to the Save Group, which funded the project. The company’s director, Mohamed Desai, handed over the completed project to mayor Mzimkhulu Thebolla on Monday. The work done included painting the walls, fixing the windows and doors as well as repairing the air-conditioners. They also attended to some of the vehicles that needed repairs. Thebolla said the partnership with the Save Group emanated from the engagements he had with businesses after his August appointment where he pleaded with the sector to lend a hand in his city’s revitalisation programme. Since October, the company has not only been helping in the CBD clean-up campaigns, they also donate equipment as well as refreshments to firefighters during infernos at the landfill site. They also recently repaired the Victoria and College roads’ bridges where the removed railings and drain covers posed a danger to those using the bridges. On Monday, Desai said the company had other similar projects in the pipeline and a plan of action for the next six months would be unveiled soon. Thebolla said he hoped the public-private partnership with Save Group would inspire other businesses around Pietermaritzburg to join hands with Msunduzi to improve the conditions of the lives of the people of the city. “Save Group came to us and said our fire station has been one of the icons of the city — it was one of the tourist attractions in town and the services that are rendered by the fire station make Msunduzi an envy of other cities,” Thebolla said. He said when the company made the offer to refurbish the facility, what its directors did not know is that the morale of the fire team was very low because of the conditions at the fire station. “Save Group were very clear in that they didn’t want anything from the municipality but to help rebuild the city. They are not expecting any favours from us — they are not expecting us to give them discounts on their rates and they are also not expecting the city to let them use any municipal services for free,” said Thebolla. 