Being a victim of a hijacking is traumatic, but being
hijacked while your young children are in the car is unthink­able. A local mother, Hususena Kara (27), was hijacked outside her
family home on Bulwer Street last Thursday. Despite the horrific experience, Kara
said she was grateful her daughters, aged three and five years old, were not in
the car with her when the incident happened as she would not have known what to
do. “If my children were in the vehicle, I would have probably
fought for them more than anything,” she said. Kara said one of the hijackers held a gun to her head,
forced her out of her Hyundai IX35 and then they drove off in it. The incident
lasted about 30 seconds. Kara said her children usually sit in the back seat when
travelling. “When any of them does sit in the front seat, they always have a
seatbelt on meaning it would have been even more difficult trying to undo their
seatbelt with someone holding a gun to your head. “I’m just grateful that my kids were not with me that
night,” she said. Kara said she is driving again but has made a personal
decision to never again drive after dark. According to the South African crime stats, there were
roughly 32 000 hijacking incidents across the country in 2018/2019. Melinda Brussow, operations manager at the National Hijack
Prevention Academy, said the good news is that hijackers do not want young
children or babies in the car when they take vehicles. “Taking the child changes the whole scenario in that every
police officer, traffic officer and even the SAPS helicopter will start looking
for the vehicle. So, it’s too much attention for their liking.” Brussow said the attackers will give you time to remove your
children, as long as the situation allows. She said it does however happen
sometimes that they need to make a quick getaway and are forced to take the
children with, but they will “drop off” the children as soon as possible after
taking the vehicle for someone to find. Brussow said as soon as the child stops using a baby seat,
it does not really matter where in the vehicle they sit. “The baby seat has to be placed directly behind the driver,
so the parent can get to the child immediately after exiting the vehicle by
opening the rear door and unstrapping the baby. “The toddler or older child in the vehicle must exit the
vehicle on the same side as the driver, do not get separated from one another. “Once out of the vehicle, move away from the scene,” said
Brussow. What to do if it happens to you Here are five tips compiled by Cool (kids’) Cabs, a child
transporting service, to keep in mind should the unthinkable happen to you: • Stay calm Most hijackers are nervous and unpredictable. If you try to
stay calm and talk to them in a clear voice, the situation is likely to go
smoother. • Do not look them in the eye You don’t want them to think you will identify them to the
police. Look directly ahead of you, speak slowly and calmly and don’t make eye
contact. • Tell them you have kids in the car Hijackers do not want to take your children — this is an
added complication for them and turns a hijacking into a kidnapping. By telling them you have children in the car they will
either move on to another vehicle or allow you to take the children out of the
car. • Don’t put up a fight Don’t put up a fight, rather tell them they can have the car
but that you are going to get your children out first. Leave everything except
your children. • Do not get out of the vehicle without your children Lean back into the backseat to unclip them from their car
seats and carry them out with you. Or, if they are older get them to unclip their seatbelts and
hold your hand out of the front seat.