Oh dear. Our city is in a big mess, isn’t it? The doomsday clock for Msunduzi is ticking away, heading
ever closer to midnight and I find I’m profoundly worried. And I reckon by now
you are too. I think it’s time to start getting prepared for midnight. I
don’t want to seem alarmist, but seriously, I’d rather be prepared to some
extent, than have blind faith in the city’s ability to provide faultless
services going forward. Faith in the municipality by residents is at a nadir right
now; just take a look at the Witness and Msunduzi Facebook pages if you don’t
believe me. And if I had a business of my own, I’d make sure I was
prepared. Many of us worry for a time when services come to a
standstill. Not forever, but certainly for an extended period. Msunduzi can’t
manage its current infrastructure demands and maintenance so it’s probable that
little pragmatic planning is being done for the future, over and above
wishlists on IDP documents. Let’s face it, our infrastructure is old and we all
know it hasn’t been maintained properly. It’s not going to last forever and
we’re already on borrowed time. We’ve been in a state of decline for so many years now that
we’re going backwards. There’s certainly no progress and we’ve all seen the
degradation. Going backwards means that parts of our road infrastructure,
especially those in the suburbs, will decline to a point where it’s just dirt
roads as potholes widen and deepen and the tar roads break down and no one
fixes them. (Ever taken a drive around Ladybrand? Jeez, it’s a nightmare and a
good example of the above. Best you avoid that Free State town.) And there are
already roads like that around our city. Going backwards could also mean protracted periods without
running water in our taps, already a weekly occurrence in many neighbourhoods
and a semi-permanent feature in others. It means electricity supplies are
erratic. It leaves me worrying about the City’s long-term ability to
pay creditors like Umgeni Water and Eskom. We’re also hearing that municipal workers don’t have the
tools they need to do a job when they pitch up to do repairs. Workers say their
municipal stores are empty of many supplies, which have either been stolen or
there’s no money to order more. Or perhaps the suppliers won’t supply because
they haven’t been paid for the last lot. Take the weedeater example we highlighted recently. There
aren’t enough to trim  the city because
they’re broken or have been stolen, even when a guard was guarding them. True
story! In a recent report we ran about a lack of services and a
leaky pipe, we quoted an Msunduzi Municipality spokesperson saying: “We appeal
for a little patience from the residents.” She was referring to grass cutting in this instance and said
there is an “ongoing grass cutting programme which is moving swiftly since it
began two weeks ago”. Erm. Only two weeks ago? Anyone noticed how high the
grass is around suburbs? I wanted to tear my hair out at that point. We have been so
patient. We were patient five years ago when we started to see some progress.
We’ve been patient every single time a new city manager starts or a new
political head takes over. But now, our patience has run out and now we’re
beginning to get a little scared. And our fear is grounded in fact and in the gasp-worthy
figures that are bandied about in the council chamber like the massive amount
owed to the city, which they’ve not managed to collect. Or all the money that Msunduzi was given to develop our
city, but failed to spend so we had to return it. Or the senseless waste of money they’ve been paying to staff
who abuse overtime. Or the shocking waste of resources like unattended water
leaks. We read with trepidation that one small TLB services the
chaotic landfill site. This in the wake of a series of serious dump fires that
blanketed the bowl of Pietermaritzburg in a fug of toxic smoke. And our rubbish
is seldom collected on time anymore, sitting outside for days on end to be
ripped apart by wandering dogs. We fear living in a city no one wants to come to because
it’s unkempt and neglected. We fear not getting the returns on our properties
when we want to sell them one day because our town is a ghost town, an ugly
blight on the record of the ruling party who couldn’t get its act together to
govern properly. We fear what the future holds here. Should we plan to retire
in the town we grew up in? Or do we head for cities which are better managed,
those that have taken the trouble to plan for the future of their residents and
do what our municipality should be doing. That seems like a better option right
now. There’s a sense of gloom and doom here again. The call for a
rates boycott is growing. Residents who pay their bills faithfully are asking
what the quid pro quo is. They’re tired of being the cash cow for a City that
fails to service their neighbourhoods. They’re tired of the earnest promises
for action that never comes. And once again communication from the City on the
queries we send them about stories we’re writing is seriously lacking. Speak to
us please! Defend yourself Msunduzi. Not with false promises and calls
for us to be patient. Say something we’ll believe. If you’re able to.  • Stephanie Saville is the deputy editor of The Witness.