Almost suffocated with a plastic bag over her head and her
fingers and hand cut in an attempt to get her rings off her fingers, a
90-year-old Hilton woman was left for dead after an armed robbery at her home
on Thursday. Hers was one of a series of attacks and brutal home
invasions against the elderly across the city the same day. This is suspected to be the work of a gang — involving three
members at each crime scene — as the modus operandi appears to be the same in
all of the robberies. A white vehicle drives around the neighbourhood a few
days before the robbery, scouting out and later surprising the victims. Theresa Whiteley (90) had returned to her Winterskloof home
in the morning after shopping with her neighbour when she was attacked. Her daughter, Penelope Kimber, said her mother was generally
accompanied onto the property by a friend but not this time as she had no
shopping bags. The three robbers confronted her mother as she got to her
door. “They forced her into the house and locked her dogs in a room
before dragging her through the house demanding access to a safe, money and
jewellery,” said Kimber. “She kept saying to them she had nothing. But they insisted.
Eventually when they noticed her rings on her fingers, they tried to pull them
off and when that didn’t work, started cutting at her fingers to get the rings
off. “Then they took a plastic bag and put it over her head to
suffocate her and also attempted to throttle her with their hands,” said
Kimber. Leaving her for dead in her room, the assailants raided the
house but Whiteley managed to summon help by pressing her panic button. “She’s 90 years old, but she’s strong and fit and found it
in herself to get help. Thankfully when they heard the alarm they fled. Within
three minutes, Aliwal Security was on scene. Had it not been for them, I’m not
sure if my mom would have survived,” said Kimber.  Rosemarie and Hugh Patrick were attacked and robbed in Clarendon on Thursday. Kimber, who is due to emigrate in April, said she would now
be looking at taking her mother with her. Meanwhile, in Pelham, Ben (83) and Delilah Westcott (82)
were also attacked shortly after arriving home at about 1.30 pm on Thursday.
They, too, returned from shopping and were unpacking their groceries when
attacked. Delilah, who was savagely assaulted, had been discharged on
Tuesday after three months in hospital and suffering three heart attacks. “I saw this white dirty car drive slowly past my house
earlier when I arrived and didn’t think much of it. I thought it was someone
wanting to view my house that is for sale. I continued with my chores and a
short while later I heard my wife shout ‘no’ and made off in her direction.
Before I could do anything this guy, who appeared out of nowhere, grabbed me
around my neck and pushed me to the floor. “They demanded money, jewellery and guns. I struggled a bit
with him and then he put his foot on my neck and pushed me down,” said
Westcott. “They asked me for the safe and I took them to the room and
showed them, gave them the key. We kept telling them we had nothing as we were
pensioners, but they insisted we had valuables. In our room, they pushed us
against the wall and took my watch and wallet. “I somehow managed to get to it and pushed it under the bed.
One of the guys thought I was going to push the panic button but I said the
clock was falling and I was picking it up,” said the brave octogenarian. After going through every cupboard and finding nothing much,
the men turned to Delilah and severely assaulted her to the extent that there
are chunks of flesh missing from her hand. The men made off after Wescott
managed to activate the panic button. The men gained access to the premises after lifting the gate
with a crowbar. In Clarendon at 12.45 pm that same day, Rosemarie (74) and
Hugh Patrick (78) had just returned from volunteering at the hospice, and were
checking their postbox (while the security gate was open) when three men, also
in a white car, pounced. “I thought the man was looking for assistance or
directions. But when I saw him walk briskly towards me, I had a sixth sense
something bad was about to happen. He walked straight to my husband, who was
behind me and grabbed him around his throat and another man grabbed me on my
arm.  Rosemarie and Hugh Patrick were attacked and robbed in Clarendon on Thursday. “‘Where’s your money, where’s your jewellery, where’s your
guns, where’s your gold?’, they asked as they pushed us down the staircase towards
our house. I kept telling them we don’t have anything but they were not
interested. “When the one man put the gun to me, I was quite unnerved
and asked them why they were doing this. “The man became irritated and told me to stop talking. I
began praying,” said Rosemarie. The burglar alarm began blaring when they entered the house
and caught the attackers off-guard. “They were in a panic when they heard the alarm going off.
Thankfully when they asked my husband to deactivate it, he was in such a state
he pressed the incorrect numbers and it kept going off. In that short time,
they took my cellphone, my earrings and rings off my hand and ran off,” she
said. “We are quite traumatised. We’v never felt insecure here and
are very shaken up. We are thankful that we were not harmed further.” Police confirmed all three cases and said they were
investigating the possibility of a syndicate operating in Pietermaritzburg. No
arrests have yet been made. In all three cases, cellphones, laptops, jewellery and other
household items were taken.