Msunduzi’s new administrator, Scelo Duma, won’t be sticking around until the City is back on its feet. He is just holding the fort until the provincial Department of Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs (Cogta) appoints the replacement for the former administrator, Sibusiso Sithole, who made an unexpected departure to Ugu District last week. On Wednesday Duma told council he expected to spend no more than three months at Msunduzi. He also reminded council that he was Cogta’s chief director for municipal governance and administration, and so his job was to oversee interventions at all the province’s municipalities, including Msunduzi. Duma made a commitment that during this period he would be at the City Hall, doing his best to work with council and the management to turn around the situation faced by Msunduzi. “I’m not here to solve your problems, I’m here to facilitate a resolution of your problems,” he told councillors and officials. His focus areas, he said, were mainly service delivery issues — such as waste management — that were highlighted when the provincial government decided to place the City under administration last year. “It’s important that this municipality achieves the turnaround in the shortest possible time around the issues of waste.” Duma said this would go beyond the landfill site and the collection of waste so funds would have to be either moved from other programmes or sourced from elsewhere to recapitalise the waste department. He said some of the issues that Msunduzi faced were being addressed by the war room that was established by province in December as part of the intervention. In terms of the progress of the turnaround plan for Msunduzi, Duma said a lot of work had been done but there was still more to do. “We are also looking at issues of financial management. I’m not sure whether councillors are aware of the extent to which some of the challenges could possibly cripple this municipality unless a quick turnaround is achieved.” He said Msunduzi was owed about R4 billion by not only households but also government and business, which he said had to be collected otherwise the municipality would struggle. He said it could not be that a municipality the size of Msunduzi still had to wait for grants from provincial and national government to fund most of its programmes when it had the ability to collect its own revenue. “Businesses must pay and there are a lot of business that are not paying. Government must pay. I don’t understand why this municipality is not switching off government offices [for non-payment].” He was also concerned about the culture of a lack of accountability at Msunduzi. “I’m positive that were are going to work well together. I’m a hard working person — straightforward. I don’t get involved in politics,” he said in a parting shot.