The University of KwaZulu-Natal administration and student representative leadership agreed, during a special meeting of the university’s council on Monday that they will undertake to jointly raise funds to clear the students’ historical R72 million debt and for the Senate to re-evaluate academic exclusions. In addition, KwaZulu-Natal Premier Sihle Zikalala has established a task team to intervene in the ongoing unrest at universities across the province. The premier said the provincial Education MEC Kwazi Mshengu was assigned to monitor the situation at UKZN as well as find a lasting solution to the impasse. The start of the 2020 academic year at various tertiary institutions, in particular the University of KwaZulu-Natal, has been hampered by violent protests as students differed with management over fees, accommodation, and historical debt. Zikalala met with UKZN management and student representatives on Friday and set up the task team after establishing that both parties were not willing to budge in their negotiations. Zikalala yesterday said, however, that progress has since been made. “The team is working and interacting with management and students, and we believe we will soon find a solution. The MEC has been sitting with UKZN management and student leaders since Monday to reach a resolution,” Zikalala said. The university’s vice-chancellor Professor Nana Poku said damage to property during this year’s protests was estimated at R31 million. On Monday night, an urgent council meeting was convened to address students’ demands. UKZN media spokesperson Sejal Desai said the council took into consideration the financial and cash flow implications of the concessions that were already in place and resolved that any additional financial clearance concessions would be self-defeating for all concerned. “The legitimacy in finding solutions to the challenges facing NSFAS students for 2020 with historic debt and not being able to contribute anything prior to registration was acknowledged,” said Desai. She said with this in mind, the council resolved, that a further analysis of the 1 435 affected students needed to be performed to ascertain the exact amounts needed to settle the R72 million debt. “All stakeholders are implored to work together to raise the funds required to immediately assist these students with payments required prior to registration, and also the funds required to settle their historic debt during the course of the academic year,” said Desai. The council further emphasised that the university could not provide free enrolment to every unfunded student whose annual family income was below R350 000 — when government policy on fully-subsidised higher education did not provide such funding. “The council has noted and welcomed the student leadership’s commitment towards raising funds for the affected students and their pledge to contribute a portion of the 2020 SRC budget towards this,” said Desai. She said council further resolved to uphold the legitimacy of the ongoing review of academic monitoring and exclusions and accepted the SRC request for the Senate to refer the 31 academically excluded students to appropriate sub-committees for reconsideration. “This decision was made because of the SRC’s position that they could not attend all the sittings of CEACOMs [College Exclusion Appeals Committee] and the AEACOM [Academic Exclusion Appeals Committee],” said Desai. As the registration period nears its end, more than 86% of students are registered and attending classes. The Student Representative Council’s Sifiso Simelane said they were happy with some of the progress made and looked forward to another (SRC) meeting on Thursday. The meeting was expected to involve various stakeholders including the premier’s office and where they hoped long-term solutions would be established.