It’s official, former Msunduzi administrator Sibusiso Sithole has been sent to Ugu District, leaving many unanswered questions in the wake of his unceremonious removal. On Thursday the provincial Department of Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs (Cogta) confirmed his “redeployment” but would not say why he had been removed in the middle of his intervention in Msunduzi. This comes just a few days after the department denied the rumour of his appointment as the acting manager for the troubled south coast district municipality. Meanwhile, at the City Hall, there was a lot of speculation surrounding Sithole’s departure, with some questioning Cogta’s decision as he had not completed his intervention, which started in April 2019. He is being replaced by Scelo Duma, who is Cogta’s chief director for municipal governance and administration. Duma is responsible for supporting and monitoring municipalities across the province and as part of that responsibility, manages municipalities under intervention, including Msunduzi. He has served as a municipal manager and administrator in several municipalities. MEC for Cogta, Sipho Hlomuka, said under the tutelage of Sithole, things began to improve at Msunduzi and the department was continuing its efforts to stabilise the municipality. “We would like to assure Msunduzi residents that matters regarding the municipality are receiving priority attention from the department. “Duma has been tasked to complete the work started by Sithole of stabili-sing waste management, assisting the municipality with the appointment of senior management and assisting the municipality to resolve its billing system challenges and revenue management, including collection,” said Hlomuka. Mayor Mzimkhulu Thebolla made the announcement of the change in the administrator at Thursady’s executive committee meeting. He said the process of handing over started on Wednesday and that Duma would soon start attending meetings of the various council structures. Responding to councillors who asked why Sithole had been removed, Thebolla said it was Cogta’s prerogative to redeploy its officials and also decide which direction the department’s intervention in Msunduzi should take. He said the administration’s initial terms of reference were still the same and he believed the new administrator would still work towards addressing those. IFP’s Thinasonke Ntombela said Cogta should have called a full council meeting to announce the change of the administrator so that the department could answer the councillors’ questions about why Sithole was removed from Msunduzi. DA caucus leader Sibongiseni Majola said the news of Sithole’s redeployment came as a shock, as he left the mandate given to him by the former MEC for Cogta, Nomusa Dube-Ncube, incomplete. “He was brought in to change the fortunes and bring stability to the municipality. “He clearly has business unfinished. We have learnt that he left in such hurry, that he never even said goodbye to his team and staff.” Majola said the move by MEC Hlomuka to send Sithole to another struggling municipality undermines the continuity of his intervention. 