Local schools have hit back at plans by the government to
increase class sizes and remove their ability to appoint staff and control
their finances. Representatives of school governing bodies (SGBs) at
Maritzburg College, Longmarket Girls’ School, Girls’ High School, Alexandra
High School, as well as some of the feeder primary schools in the city, held an
urgent meeting with the Governing Body Foundation to express their concerns
about proposed amendments to the South African Schools Act (1996). These include: • making changes to admission criteria, which would give the
minister for Basic Education the power to make schools accept more pupils; • giving Education officials more power over the appointment
of staff at public schools, especially those in senior positions, principals
and deputy principals; and • requiring SGBs to submit detailed financial statements to
the department on a quarterly basis. Dr Anthea Cereseto, chief executive officer for the
Governing Body Foundation, said the prospect of larger class sizes may have to
be accepted by schools, whether or not they have invested resources in building
extra classrooms and employing more teachers to ensure good pupil-to-teacher
ratios. But, it’s not something school governing bodies are willing to accept. Kavith Harillall, a member of the Longmarket Girls’ School
SGB, said parents who pay extra money in school fees have the right to have a
say in their children’s education. “We currently help sort out the facilities
and bring in extra teachers to improve pupil/teacher ratios, and we pay extra
to be able to do this,” he added. Doug Mundell, acting chairperson of the Maritzburg College
SGB, said that while amendments to the Act were helpful to around 90% of the
government schools in the country who don’t have the benefit of proactive SGBs,
they could have a hugely negative effect on schools who do have effective SGBs
and a committed parent body. “We are at a T-junction and if we don’t make the right
decision now, it could damage the system so much that it could take years to
recover, if ever. “We want to protect education because that is where the
future of our country lies, we need to work together to find solutions.” Hector Molale, chairperson of the GHS school governing body,
says there is no evidence that SGBs have failed in all 25 000 public schools
countrywide. “Taking away authority from the SGB to appoint management staff
such as HoDs or principals diminishes their role tremendously,” he added. “At the same time it begs the question whether appointment
of senior management is more important than, say, level one teachers, hence the
demotion of SGBs. “Participation in SGBs is likely to diminish as less
authority and accountability will discourage those wanting to contribute to
school development. Schools will not be better served. Period. “Having been a chairman of one SGB or the other for over 10
years, my observation is that successful SGBs are not a result of the school
being well resourced, but of willing and able parents, strong governance
systems and above all a strong chairman and executive committee and other SGB
members playing a strong oversight role.” Changes ‘to strengthen governance’ Responding to questions from Weekend Witness, Elijah
Mhlanga, the spokesperson for the Department of Basic Education, said the
proposed changes were being made to strengthen governance in schools. “The intention is to close gaps that have existed resulting
in all sorts of malpractices taking place. Generally change makes people
uncomfortable but it is for a good reason,” he added. “The government has a responsibility to look after all the
schools to address the historical factors that have led to current
inequalities.” Mhlanga said that the amended bill was the result of a
process which started three years ago. “A team considered all the inputs from South Africans who
submitted input. It took the task team 18 months to go through all the inputs
from members of the public. “This is not the start of the process but the final phases
and of course Parliament will have its own phase of public participation.” Both the Governing Board Foundation and SGBs hope that
Minister of Basic Education Angie Motshekga, who met with members of the
foundation this week, will reconsider some of the amendments. Molale said they
all wanted to find “sensible outcomes” that would strengthen both education and
school governance. Mundell agreed, saying that College was keen to find a
positive way forward and was happy to work in collaboration with other public
schools in the Maritzburg and KZN Midlands to ensure that all children
benefited from an improved education system.