Formidable efforts by City workers restored power to homes and businesses in Pietermaritzburg and Hilton left in the dark by last Thursday’s and Saturday’s storms. Msunduzi Municipality spokesperson Thobeka Mafumbatha said the City had teams of workers from the elecricity and parks departments working round the clock on Sunday and on Monday to remove fallen trees, fix powerlines and make repairs to transformers. “We would like to commend our staff for their commitment,” she added. Mopping up operations will continue around the city for the next few days as municipal staff cut up the fallen trees and branches and take them to the garden refuse centre to be recycled. The 100 km/h winds and heavy downpour left homes, churches and community buildings in Mpophomeni and Mafakathini without roofs, and an estimated 78 homes between Edendale and Impendle damaged. Residents living in Hilton, Foxhill, Mpumelelo, Bishopstowe, Claridge, Mpumuza and several streets in Pietermaritzburg were left without power. Elsewhere in KwaZulu-Natal the storms destroyed much of the Mhlaba JSS School in Umzimkhulu; while in Richmond’s Ndaleni, Magoda, Phatheni, Shayamoya, Smozomeni areas, as well as in the town itself, around 400 homes were severely or irreparably damaged.  Much of the Mhlaba JSS School in Umzimkhulu was destroyed by the storms which hit KZN at the weekend. The Department of Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs’ (Cogta) disaster management teams are currently working with the Umuziwabantu, Umgeni, Ndwedwe, Umvoti, Kokstad, Umzumbe, Newcastle, Ubuhlebezwe and Umzimkhulu municipalities to help those affected by the storms. Spokesperson Senzelwe Mzila said that while damage assessments had been delayed in some areas, which had been cut off by mudslides, teams were now on the ground providing food and blankets to those in need. Maritzburg NGO, Gift of the Givers, is also helping those affected by the storms, especially in Richmond and Pietermaritzburg. They have been providing food parcels, blankets, stationery packs, sanitary pads and roof sheeting to victims. Cogta MEC Sipho Hlomuka, meanwhile, sent his condolences to the family of a 28-year-old woman who died when the car she was travelling in was washed off a low lying bridge in the Nonoti area on the North Coast. Three other passengers survived. Hlomuka warned residents to be vigilant, saying the severe weather conditions continued to pose a serious risk to human life. “We are appealing to residents to take the necessary precautions in order to protect themselves from the incidents we continue to experience,” he added.