Residents living in the vicinity of the allegedly noisy Stage Lounge restaurant in Scottsville can hopefully sleep in peace for now after the high court granted a temporary interdict in their favour. In terms of the interim interdict, obtained recently by Msunduzi Municipality, live bands and disco-type music is no longer allowed at the premises. Neither are “disturbing noises” permitted. In addition, the popular hangout for students has to comply with the building plan issued in respect of the property. The owners of 44 Alan Paton Avenue — Sameera Cassimjee, Siva Narsimaloo Chetty, Yugan Pillay; as well as the tenants and owners of Stage Lounge — Lebogang Lesia and Thembi Mokoena — have until March 3 to give reasons to the court why the temporary order should not be made final. Acting municipal manager Nelisiwe Ngcobo claimed in court papers that the land is being used in a manner contrary to the municipality’s land use scheme. She said it is being operated in such a way that it constitutes a neighbourhood nuisance. Also, buildings have been erected on the property without the required permission. She said that when the town planning inspector, Mbongeni Dlomo, visited the premises last year, he found that the property was being used as a place of public entertainment and not merely a restaurant. Due to a shortage of parking spaces on the property, vehicles had been parked on the pavement and on Alan Paton Avenue, thereby blocking one of the lanes on that road. Dlomo also allegedly found that alcohol was being sold without a licence. He also said there were loud performances of live music and a breach of the stipulated closing times. Meat was being braaied on open fires in the manner of a shisa nyama. She said the ward councillor, Ludwig Winterbach, e-mailed the municipality a petition signed by residents on the neighbouring property, known as The Palms. In the petition residents complained about “excessively loud music being generated on the premises” at unreasonable times. Winterbach had attempted to set up a meeting between the residents and the business owners but this did not yield positive results, she said. Ngcobo added that several compliance notices were issued to Mokoena last year, but nothing was done to remedy the situation. Despite these notices, residents continued to complain because the problems carried on. Ngcobo said a resident from The Palms, Zainab Mahomed, said in an e-mail that the noise has been ongoing since June last year, causing disruption to residents’ sleep. He also made a video depicting boisterous activity on the property. Ngcobo said the neighbours have attempted to address their complaints to the business operators who have fobbed them off, claiming that they have a business to run.