The MEC for Transport has to fork out R2,6 million within 30 days for not attending to a pothole on the M19 which caused a cyclist serious injuries when he hit it and fell. The order was granted by the Pietermaritzburg high court this week. Of the amount, R61 800 is for the damage to the bicycle of Andrew Rich from Durban. The self-employed video editor hit the pothole on April 14, 2014, lost control of his bike and fell. He fractured his ribs and collarbone, his fingers were injured, and he sustained bruises and cuts. On Tuesday, his attorney, Michael Friedman, said Rich said he was very happy that the matter has been concluded and he felt he received a fair settlement. In 2018 a high court judge found that the department was liable to pay damages. The judge heard evidence that the pothole measured 133 cm from north to south, 85 cm across and was 50 to 60 mm deep. It occupied 23% of the left lane adjacent to the yellow line. The pothole was just before the off­ramp leading to the M32 road to New Germany (the Blair Atholl turn-off). This week, the amount in damages was determined. Court papers said Rich had been a competitive cyclist for 30 years, starting on BMX bikes and graduating to road cycling and track racing, for which he was awarded his Springbok colours in 1999/1992. He was a South African track champion for three years for sprinting. He was training for the national track championships at the time of the incident. His injuries prevented him from competing and he remained off the bike for two to three months. The papers said that Rich suffered a loss of income for six weeks after the incident during which he was unable to work. And for a year afterwards he was not able to work in full capacity. Industrial psychologists concluded that if he had not been injured, he would have continued working at the level he did prior to the incident and his income would have increased based on inflation. He would have continued working until the age of 70. As a result of his physical, psychological and emotional limitations and functional impairment, he is likely to continue functioning in the same position but at a reduced level of occupational performance. Orthopedic surgeons said Rich’s present complaints include discomfort in his right shoulder especially when lying on his side. He also has discomfort in his shoulder when doing press-ups and other gym activities. Rich has a deformity of his left little finger with mild discomfort. There were various reports about his medical condition after the accident and now that were among the court documents. 