Officials from the troubled Ezemvelo KZN Wildlife were sent packing by members of the provincial Standing Committee on Public Accounts (Scopa) after failing to come up with a turnaround plan to rectify poor management practices at the entity. Ezemvelo KZN Wildlife, which was one of the KZN government entities that appeared before Scopa at the provincial legislature on Thursday, was heavily criticised for its failure to address weakness identified by the Auditor-General, Kimi Makwetu. Amongst other things, Makwetu found that the entity had failed to follow proper procurement procedures and had incurred millions of rands in irregular expenditure. The conservation entity, which falls under the provincial Economic Development Department, had also failed to appoint properly qualified people in its supply chain management (SCM) unit, resulting in the flouting of procurement processes, the AG found. However, when the Ezemvelo KZN Wildlife management presented its remedial action plan to Scopa, MPLs were not convinced that the plan will prevent the recurrence of the several breaches identified by Makwetu. In their presentation, Ezemvelo officials revealed that the entity was also assisting certain community members living around its Didima Resort in Drakensberg to set up a Section 21 company to run some camping sites at the resort. However, the proposal was rejected by Scopa members, who said such a company was bound to benefit a select few and exclude the majority of the community. Scopa chairperson, Maggie Govender, who was also not impressed with Ezemvelo’s failure to appoint a permanent SCM manager, described its involvement in the setting up of the Section 21 company as something “bordering on criminality”. “What if another Section 21 company comes up and demands to be given the same contract? Your mandate is conservation and not to set up companies. “Your response is terrible and we won’t accept it,” she said. IFP MPL Mntomuhle Khawula accused Ezemvelo officials of conducting themselves as if they were operating within a “Banana republic”. “Your presentation is a joke,” he said. DA MPL Francois Rodgers said it was unacceptable that Ezemvelo kept coming up with the same excuses each time it appeared before Scopa. “I have been hearing the same things since I become a member of the KZN Legislature seven years ago, it’s depressing. It’s always the same thing, the supply chain management,” he said. Economic Development MEC Nomusa Dube-Ncube, who agreed that Ezemvelo management should go back and prepare another presentation for Scopa, implied that its officials had misled her. “They gave me the impression that they were assisting community members around Didima to form a co-operative and not a Section 21 company,” she said.