The provincial Department of Co-operative Governance and Traditional Affairs (Cogta) has instituted a forensic investigation into allegations of maladministration, corruption and political interference at uMgungundlovu District. This is just months after the Special Investigating Unit (SIU) swooped into uMgungundlovu over a separate inquiry into tender corruption. Council was informed at a special council meeting on Monday of the latest probe by Cogta’s director for forensic auditing, Sheetal Govender. She said the decision for the investigation was made by MEC Sipho Hlomuka, after the department received allegations of maladministration, fraud, corruption and statutory non-compliance. First on the list of the matters to be investigated is the alleged failure by some councillors to declare their financial interests, or that they had partners, spouses, relatives and close friends employed by the municipality. Govender said they also had to investigate the unauthorised disclosure of confidential information. She said the investigative team would look into instances where councillors were alleged to have interfered in the management or administration of the municipality without the mandate of council “as a result this has factionalised the municipality”. The probe will also delve alleged tender irregularities in the procurement and payments in some of uMgungundlovu’s projects such as Camperdown’s R96,9 million Nkanyezini water supply scheme. Govender said they would also look into all capital projects from 2012 to date where contracts were awarded using section 36 of the supply chain management, resulting in the district deviating from normal procurement processes. The investigators will also probe the alleged irregularities in the contract for uMgungundlovu’s controversial multimillion-rand water provision project — commonly known as the Orio project — which received a grant of more than €14 million from the Netherlands government in 2012. Cogta also received allegations that uMgungundlovu made double payments to service providers and some of the district’s employees. Speaking to The Witness on the sidelines of Govender’s announcement, mayor Thobekile Maphumulo thanked Hlomuka for taking the initiative for the alleged irregularities in the district to be investigated so that they get to the bottom of them. “If our name is not received by our communities in a proper way, we need to have something to prove that we are clean and if we are not clean then, we need also to tell our communities where we’ve gone wrong.” Maphumulo believed that the investigation would be fair as it would look into the conduct of both the politicians and the district’s employees. Cogta’s probe comes just a few months after the Special Investigating Unit (SIU) swooped into uMgungundlovu on a separate inquiry on tenders related to events such as the Mandela Day Marathon and community izimbizo for the integrated development plans. Both the IFP and DA welcomed Cogta’s forensic investigation and committed to co-operate and assist where possible. “Looking at the seriousness of the terms of reference we really feel that the MEC [Hlomuka] should’ve placed the district under administration — in terms of section 139 (1)(b) of the Constitution — long ago as it is failing to execute its duties,” said DA caucus leader, Bongumusa Nhlabathi. IFP executive committee member, Bukelani Zuma, said they hoped the probe will leave no stone unturned, but “one can assume this investigation is also part of infighting within the ruling party. I say this because there is an ongoing investigation by the SIU with its terms of reference and there are certain people within the municipality who are allegedly blocking the investigation. And now there is this investigation with its own terms of reference.”