Fourteen students have been arrested for being involved in
violent protesting across all University of KwaZulu-Natal campuses in the past
week. Police confirmed one student at the Pietermaritzburg campus
was arrested for an incident on Monday night where a storage room at an exam
venue was torched. He faces charges of public violence and damage to property
and is expected to appear in court soon. UKZN said another 13 students were arrested for protesting
at Edgewood, Howard and Westville campuses. This comes as UKZN shut its doors during the first week of
the academic year for the second year in a row because of protesting, with the
academic programme only set to resume next Monday. At the Pietermaritzburg campus, an annex to the William
O’Brien exam venue was set alight amid clashes between students and police on
Monday night. The area included a storage space, kitchen, guardhouse and
an office. It is directly opposite a student residence.  Firefighters on Tuesday put out  the last embers at the William O’Brien building. This is the second time in about three years that part of
the same exam venue has been set alight, and it is not far from another
building that was just refurbished after fire damage. The Risk Management Services (RMS) headquarters in Durban’s
Westville campus and an office for the HIV and Aids Support Unit on Howard
campus were also torched this week. But the Pietermaritzburg campus Student Representative
Council (SRC) on Tuesday told The Witness that protesting would not stop until
UKZN’s “arrogant management” came to the party on a range of issues, including
allowing students with historical debt to register. The SRC said students have just nine days to resolve
outstanding debt issues before registration ends, and the SRC says students in
debt have to pay 15% of that debt before registering, some having to pay tens
of thousands of rands. UKZN, however, is adamant that it cannot grant too much
leeway to students, having previously said the university’s debt stood at about
R1,7 billion at the end of last year. The university has informed students that no student had to
pay 100% of their debt before registration, the maximum amount of debt payable
before registration is R45 000, and nearly 70% of pupils in debt would have to
pay a maximum of R15 000. Unathi Dimane, the SRC president at the Pietermaritzburg
campus, said the SRC was struggling to negotiate with management. She did not
have any information as to how the William O’Brien building caught alight. “We don’t encourage students to burn buildings, and I doubt
any student in their right mind would do that.” Staff and students, meanwhile, described going to UKZN was
like “walking into a danger zone” in the wake of the fire on Monday night. The university’s HR division sent a message to staff
advising them to leave campus when necessary because campuses had become
“volatile and unpredictable”. Kavendren Padayachee, a third-year student, said he relived
memories of the William O’Brien venue being torched in his first year. He said student protests happened like clockwork at UKZN. “They always start in early February and late March so no
one is surprised anymore. I do see that sometimes first years are too afraid to
return and wait until everything is settled. “It’s so stressful to meet the demands of student life, and
that’s being made worse by protesting.” Padayachee has been caught in protest crossfire before. “Last year I was in a lecture and someone sprayed pepper
spray up into the fans and it went into my eyes. Yesterday as we walked to
class protesters threw branches and rocks at people.” One veteran staff member at the Pie-termaritzburg campus
feared UKZN’s reputation will be damaged by all the protests, adding it felt
like walking into a minefield during times of protest. “It is an unsafe environment and anything can just erupt. “All universities do this, but UKZN always sets the trend
every year. It needs to be addressed.” UKZN spokesperson Ashton Boderick said the university
“strongly denounces all acts of criminal behaviour”. 