Tobacco boss Yusuf Kajee has come out smoking against allegations of being involved in illegal cigarette sales during the lockdown. Police raided his premises on Tuesday. He said on Wednesday he has been propositioned by several people and has had threats that his home and factory would be set alight and his cars petrol-bombed. Kajee, the chief executive officer of the Amalgamated Tobacco Manufacturing cigarette company situated in Portland Drive, Mkondeni, where he also lives, has had to increase security amidst the threats. Growing dissent against Kajee, fuelled by allegations of a business partnership with the Zumas which played out on social media this week, led to him revealing details of people who have been soliciting him to sell them cigarettes to The Witness. Kajee said Edward Zuma, the son of former president Jacob Zuma, resigned from the company in 2014 and plays no role in the business. The Witness is in possession of several voice notes, apparently sent to Kajee by several well-known people and members of the public imploring him to sell cigarettes to them. The voice notes, provided to The Witness by Kajee, have not been verified and therefore those mentioned in the voice notes cannot be named. The prospective buyers ask to meet with Kajee to discuss “deals” in person and provide details of the illegal cigarette sales they have been involved in. One voice note says: “I would like to meet with you or talk to you about some sort of business proposal. Let’s put it this way, I thought in person would be better than actually put on social media where it can be recorded. Cigarettes. At the end of the day we have been distributing CK, Kings, Carvella, don’t even know if 666 are your brand down to Chatsworth, Bluff, Mobeni, Durban Central … a lot of buyers in Maritzburg. The pricing has gone crazy which is one thing … which is okay, we understand. I have people that would buy like five boxes a day and I have like 10 of them [buyers] who want to know if we could maybe negotiate with you or maybe you could put us in touch with those who can regularly supply us and move the product every second day, 20 boxes type of thing.” The same person reveals well-known business people in Pietermaritzburg and some foreigners from whom he has been buying cigarette stock for resale during the lockdown. The man says he would prefer to sell Kajee’s brands rather than the 666 brand. “People are feeding the 666 brand and it’s killing CK and Carvella because it’s cheaper ... If you don’t want to deal with me directly at least give me a name and number where you guys benefit from our sales. “Else let’s meet, let’s talk, I’m good for it. I need to survive,” said the man. Kajee said he also received voice notes from a woman identifying herself as the man’s girlfriend — asking “All we were looking for is someone to give us ATM at a cheaper price so we can support you, support ourselves and help people out. I have networks set up in Durban, people messaging me non- stop, there’s big, big orders. Is there no way you can help us out?” Kajee said with all the offers made to him and the sales he could have done during lockdown he would have been able to “retire more than comfortably” but he operated within the scope of the law. “I have come under undue pressure from all kinds of people. My family, my workers and I have been threatened. I have had people driving past my house and factory, stopping outside my house, threats on my phone, on Whats­App and Facebook all because I have refused to sell cigarettes and because people think I am associated with Zuma and I am tired of it,” said Kajee. Rumours of having heavily armed security guards to protect the illegal dealers arriving at his premises have also ruffled his feathers. “I have had to intensify security at the factory to protect my family and I and to protect the business. “There’s been word, besides the threats to burn the place down, that organised criminals are targeting the place to steal what stock we have. Am I not entitled to protect myself, my family and my business?” asked Kajee. He said the company had not been manufacturing cigarettes since the lockdown was implemented and had instead been distributing food parcels. A tour of the factory clearly showed that no production of cigarettes has taken place in a while and instead most of the factory space is being used for the hamper distribution. Kajee said his factory would, however, be starting operations again this week for an export order for Mozambique and other African countries.