 Allow all one-on-one businesses to open. That is the desperate plea from beauty
professionals, including hairdressers, who want to be allowed to perform a
beauty service privately with one client per stylist in the salon at a time. Last Wednesday, Co-operative Governance Minister
Nkosazana Dlamini Zuma announced that under level 4 lockdown hairdressers
cannot re-open. Dlamini-Zuma said hairdressers and nail salons
would only be allowed to operate under level 1 of the lockdown as their
operations are “too risky”. But over 69 000 people have signed an online
petition launched by the Employers’ Organisation for Hairdressing, Cosmetology
and Beauty (EOHCB) at the weekend, asking government to reconsider its
decision. “The survival of our industry and the survival of
those participating in it is at the mercy of the Covid-19 Commission Command
Centre. Under strict hygiene and safety measures, our industry will be able to
serve the public without compromising efforts in place to combat the spreading
of and exposure to Covid-19,” read its description. The EOHCB said on its Facebook page on Monday it is
preparing another sectoral submission in accordance with the published
regulations for submission later this week. Local hairdressers said they are battling to make
ends meet as they enter their third month with little to no income. Shantal
Benecke, the owner of Blu Gel Hair Salon in Scottsville, said the decision just
does not make sense. “Financially this decision is screwing us over,”
Benecke said. “I believe that our salon is even cleaner than Northdale
Hospital. We always sterilise and wear masks and gloves. I don’t understand how
some shops can open, and we can’t. A taxi can have seven people and I can’t
have one person in my care.” Benecke said since the initial announcement of the
lockdown, she has not been able to pay salaries for her 17 employees. “There’s
no clients coming in. I can’t even pay my rent. The unemployment insurance fund
is also letting them down. They processed our forms, but I think they are just
backlogged.” Eric Muller, the owner of Eric Muller Hairdressing
on Victoria Road, said he has also been battling with the unemployment
insurance fund. “Only one out of seven employees have been paid. My
workforce is battling, and they have bills to pay. I have no idea what is going
to happen to my business by the time we reach level 1. By the time we’re
allowed to work, no one will be coming in to support us,” said Muller. Another salon owner, Craik Spiers, said, “It’s very
unfair considering that taxis can operate with seven people sitting close to
one another. They should allow us to go back at least on a level 3. We will
take all the right precautions.” “The overheads aren’t going away. It’s only the
salaries that are going away. I’d rather pay salaries than the other running
costs because I would like my people to be able to feed their families.” Spiers said he has also not been able to pay a
single cent to his work force. “We don’t have huge reserves sitting around. Nobody
expected this and insurance won’t pay out for it either. We are devastated at
this level one status.” Kate Shange of Imvelo Beauty Square, which has over
17 beauty parlours across the province, said she was losing thousands of rands
daily. “We are only allowed to sell haircare products. You
can’t open a shop for that. On the other hand, we have landlords on our back
asking for rent money. It’s just a depressing situation.” Shange employs 225 people. “We have applied for assistance without success. We
were told the turnaround time for UIF is 48 hours. “That 48 hours has turned to days and it’s probably
going to be weeks and months. By the time we get to level one, there will be no
hair and beauty industry,” said Shange.  