Forty-nine schools in the uMgungundlovu District have been broken into and had items amounting to several thousands of rands stolen since the start of the lockdown. The schools, situated across the district from urban to rural areas, will, however, be ready to open for grade 7 and 12 pupils on June 1 as none were vandalised to the extent that they are not operational. Some of the affected schools include Maritzburg College where there was theft and damage to windows of the dining hall, five staff cars and electric fencing amounting to R200 000. The Plessislaer area seems to be the hardest hit, with about eight schools having been broken into. Items stolen include appliances, projectors, food and cleaning material, stationery and building material. In addition, electrical wiring, light fittings, copper wires and pipes, fences, doors, and burglar guards were damaged. Richmond and surrounding areas were also targeted with about six schools having had doors, computers, TV flat-screens and appliances stolen. In the Mountain Rise area, the Ramatha Road primary school was broken into and a bed and table from the caretaker’s quarters, two doors and two gates were stolen. Russel Primary’s old store room was burnt but nothing was stolen. In the Wartburg, Dalton and New Hanover areas, a 62-000 litre water tank (Dalton Primary), doors, chairs, laptops, toilet seats and sinks were among stolen items, while some of those schools had their science laboratories vandalised and chemicals stolen. In the Taylor’s Halt, Hilton, Impendle, Mooi River and Harburg areas principals’ offices, libraries and staff rooms were broken into. Bicycles, computers, pots, sports jerseys, sporting equipment and computers stolen. Some of the schools were broken into repeatedly. Over 400 KZN schools have been burgled, vandalised and burned since the beginning of the lockdown, but the KZN Education Department said it was confident these schools would be ready to open their doors at the appointed time. Department spokesperson Kwazi Mthethwa said assessments still needed to be conducted, and at some schools mobile classrooms would be provided while others received quick renovations. “We are still finalising and want to see that everything is done accordingly,” he said. “Remember that it is not all grades that are going back to school at once. So if there are issues with a particular class, learners will be moved to available classes within the school ...” said Mthethwa. 11 300 Grade 12 pupils 17 835 Grade 7 pupils 487 schools Department to supply a cumulative amount of 4 716 (5-litre) and 4 044 (25-litre) bottles of sanitiser; 185 (5-litre) and 140 (16-litre) disinfectants; 2 000 thermometers (one thermometer per 75 pupils); 17 000 reusable masks (not clear whether for pupils or teachers); 8 840 (500 ml) hand sanitiser; 72 schools needed water tanks; 5 500 permits (enabling staff movement) signed and 8 800 expected to still be signed.