Nothing has been done about the “perpetrator” with a birthmark who allegedly raped a boy, said Darren Goddard on Wednesday in the Pietermaritzburg High Court. He said he finds this “distressing”. Goddard said on Wednesday that the boy has disclosed that his perpetrator had a birthmark on his private parts. Since his arrest, he has been taken for two medical examinations. Both found no birthmark on him. “The boy remains in danger,” added the former school counsellor. He continued with his testimony on Wednesday before Judge Kate Pillay, giving his version of events. The child Goddard is talking about was in Grade R when he was the boy’s school counsellor. Goddard said that after the boy’s medical findings — that rape had taken place— the child was interviewed by police. During the interview, Goddard said the child’s attention was drawn to the alleged findings of the doctor. For instance, the boy was told by the officer, “the doctor told me you got hurt”.... “Tell me how you got hurt”. The boy’s response was that someone threw a ball at him. The officer then asked, “Who threw the ball?” The boy responded he did not know. Then the officer asked whether the ball was big or small. Goddard said the interview this child had with the officer is highly suggestive. “They are indicative of an intention on the part of the interviewer to gain a specific response from the child.” Goddard denies he counselled the boy three times a week, saying he saw him once. He also denied ever doing anything inappropriate to this child. Goddard also said he never kissed the child on the forehead. The boy said once a senior teacher and Goddard molested him and Goddard recorded this with an army camera. Goddard denied this happened. He added the senior teacher was never present during counselling of any child. Goddard then moved on to dispute the evidence of two brothers that they were allegedly abused by him. One of the boys, in Grade 2 at the time, could not remember the first letter of the alphabet, said Goddard. When he testified in court, he could not tell the difference between a week and month. This same child had apparently written a letter vividly describing being sexually assaulted by Goddard. He questioned how the boy could have penned the letter when he had trouble remembering the first letter of the alphabet. “I do not believe he could have written this letter independently ... I have no doubt it was a repetition of something he overheard or he was assisted in writing it.” Of the twins, Goddard said their final testimony became a repetition of the other’s evidence. His concern is how their evidence “evolved and interacted with each other”. The trial continues. 