The KwaZulu-Natal provincial government on Thursday
promised ‘maximum enforcement’ of the Covid-19 lockdown as a massive blitz on
lockdown-breakers in Pietermaritzburg gridlocked the city. KwaZulu-Natal commissioner Lieutenant-General
Khombinkosi Jula, who was at some of the roadblocks in the city, has warned
locals, who have been flouting regulations a grand scale, to brace themselves
for more roadblocks and enforcement “until they obey the Covid-19 rules”. He said the operation was held after he was
bombarded with complaints from residents, including Msunduzi Mayor Mzimkhulu
Thebolla, and the municipal traffic department. Enforcement officials at the road-blocks were checking
for permits and if people were wearing masks. Local police commanders were not notified of the
operation and were caught by surprise when hundreds of officers descended on
the city at dawn. The provincial commissioner led a multi-disciplinary enforcement
team from the South African Police Services, the South African National Defence
Force, Department of Health and Msunduzi Traffic to shut down the city with
roadblocks at all entrances to the CBD. Jula, speaking at the roadblock on Chota Motala
Road, said he was shocked by what his members had encountered during the
roadblocks that began at 5 am and continued for most of the day. “We received a lot of complaints from
Pietermaritzburg. It looks like when we moved to Level 4 of lockdown people
here thought the lockdown was over but that’s not the case, we are still in
lockdown. The lockdown is continuing and they must obey the rules or face the
legal consequences. “Just here we have arrested at least three people
who were in possession of illicit cigarettes and we inspected about 1 000
vehicles — 10 of which were unroadworthy vehicles. We also had health officials
screening people for Covid-19. The roadblocks in the city is going to be an
ongoing thing until we see a difference,” said Jula. Jula encouraged people to stay at home and reminded
those who had to go out for essential items and work that they had to wear a
mask at all times in public. Msunduzi acting traffic senior superintendent Bheki
Xulu said his department had tried to bring things under control but people
were just not complying. “We weren’t winning the battle as local law
enforcers. We were left with no option but to seek help,” said Xulu who
confirmed that his department invited provincial police. “The people of
Maritzburg undermine us when we are telling them to obey the rules. “Either people don’t understand lockdown or don’t
care. We want people to understand that it’s not business as usual. Our fear is
that this great influx of people and those loitering around will only spread
the virus.” Xulu said he had also received complaints about
non-compliance from the mayor and the local political leadership. “There is no
need for such an influx into the CBD. “People must stay at home and if they need to buy
food they must go to their nearest mall.” Well-placed enforcement sources said the hot spots
were Pietermaritz and Retief Streets, East Street, the CBD hardware stores, the
Raisethorpe business district and the area around the Liberty Midlands Mall. Spokesperson for the Department of Community Safety,
Kwanele Ncalane, said “From today [Thursday] onward there will be maximum
enforcement. Those found roaming the streets without a permit will be
arrested.” The travel window period, which ended at midnight on
Thursday, had led to a sharp increase in the movement of people, and Ncalane
said authorities had been observing the situation with deep concern. “We know
that they are a number of people who took advantage of the window period and
disregarded all Covid-19 regulations. “Our message to them is that all this must now come
to an end, tough action will be taken against anyone who breaks the
regulations,” he said. At 1 189 confirmed Covid-19 cases as of Wednesday,
KZN is one of the three provinces with the highest infection rates in the
country. With eThekwini and Ilembe districts being the main
Covid-19 hot spots, there were concerns that the unrestricted movement of
people would result in the quick spread of infections to other areas of the
province. While it took the country 33 days to move from
level 5 lockdown to level 4, it remains unclear how long it will take for
government to move to less strict level 3 regulations. University of KwaZulu-Natal Covid-19 expert and
Dean of School of Nursing and Public Health, Professor Mosa Moshabela, said it
was impossible to have a time frame. “It all depends on the behaviour of citizens. If
they adhere to all the safety measures then the rate of infections will
inevitably go down, creating conditions for the government to move the country
to level 3,’’ he said. During his KZN visit on Tuesday, President Cyril
Ramaphosa warned citizens to expect a spike in infections. Moshabela explained that Ramaphosa was referring to
what experts regard as the “peak” of infections. While government was currently working on the assumption
that the peak would be reached around September, Moshabela said there would be
more pressure on the health system should the peak be reached earlier than
September. “Should we reach the peak earlier, say in June, then the country’s
health system would not be able to cope,” said Moshabela.