The Governing Body Foundation (GBF) has advised parents who are thinking about taking their children out of school or opting for home schooling in fear of Covid-19, to consider the implications it might have later. As both grade 7 and 12 pupils are expected to go back to the classroom next week, some parents have decided against sending their children to school fearing they might be infected with the virus. Addressing the nation on Sunday, President Cyril Ramaphosa said while parents have the obligation to make sure that their children have access to education, they will not be forced to send them back to school as the country battles the pandemic. Speaking to The Witness, GBF’s executive officer in KwaZulu-Natal Dr Erna de Lange said though they understand the plight of the parents, home schooling or completely removing a child from school will have repercussions. De Lange said while making that decision, it’s important to note that a child might not have a place at school next year or whenever a parent decides to send them back to school. “Parents have a choice of whether they want to bring their children or not. But as the Governing Body Foundation we feel that children benefit more from being around other children in a learning environment than being with their parents at home,” she said. “As the minister [of Basic Education, Angie Motshekga] said, parents mustn’t think they can take their children out for home schooling and think next year they will just bring them back. The school might not have a space for you.” De Lange also said those who have chosen the home-schooling path need to have a thorough understanding of it. “The minister was quite clear about home-schooling. You have to register with the department for it. “You can’t just keep your child at home and think that today you are doing a bit of maths and reading tomorrow. That’s not education.” De Lange said they have suggested to their schools that they should be sensitive to apprehensive parents and support their children with online learning or by providing them with extra work. “Online teaching is good but not as good as having a teacher in the classroom. We are hoping that parents wouldn’t take their children totally out of the system,” she said. “This support of children at home can’t be indefinite because as the other grades are coming back, the teachers are going to have the responsibility to those in the school. “It’s going to be difficult to teach a couple online and be in school to teach as well. It’s a very difficult position but it’s a parent’s choice. “This is a difficult time for everybody. I understand that parents are apprehensive.” Last week, Deputy Minister of Basic Education Makgabo Mhaule said “If you say my child will not attend a physical school, then arrange for the home schooling and you will be supported if you follow all the guidelines for home schooling.”