Three Pietermaritzburg women have been bust by Home Affairs officials after trying to register “ghost children”. The trio, aged between 27 and 45, were arrested at the Church Street Home Affairs office on Tuesday after producing fake hospital-issued proofs of birth and clinic cards. The cards are allegedly being printed in the city and are sold at R1 500 for people to use to register to receive child-support grants. Police said the women are expected to appear in court soon. The manager of Home Affairs Xolani Maphumulo said in the past few weeks since the start of Covid-19, they have noted a surge in the number of fraudulent births registered at their offices. Maphumulo said while new mothers are normally asked to bring their children along for birth certificate registration, due to the Covid-19 outbreak the office had made an exception to this rule and mothers no longer need to bring their children in. “People got wind of this and they are now taking chances and selling these proofs of birth and clinic cards,” Maphumulo said. He said that besides the three who were arrested on Tuesday, they have picked up other fraudulent applications on their systems, which will be cancelled with the national Home Affairs office. Two of the women produced counterfeit documents with stamps from the East Street clinic, while the other one had a fake stamp from Grey’s Hospital. The office is investigating another case, after it emerged that earlier this month another woman registered two fraudulent births. The Witness has been reliably informed that there is a Pietermaritzburg woman who is the mastermind behind the illegal issuing of counterfeit documents for the purposes of applying for the grant. “Ordinarily, we encourage registration of children at the maternity ward. In that case, the person will leave the hospital with the baby and certificate.” Maphumulo said officials immediately picked up the fake stamps because they have samples of the stamps of all Pietermaritzburg hospitals. “We have all the stamps and before we proceed with the application, we compare dimensions, the font and alignment. Some of the fake stamps are too obvious.” He said upon questioning the three women, they confessed they had bought the fraudulent documents. He said the office will be conducting a thorough investigation to establish if any other fraudulent birth registrations have been produced. “They said you pay R1 500 for a pack with a proof of birth and a clinic card. The other two had already paid and one of the women said she was going to pay the woman after she receives her Sassa grant payment. “We are very vigilant. We know the hospitals that we work with. As much we’re discouraging mothers not to bring babies in the office, if you are found to be committing fraud, we will arrest you for defrauding the state.” He said that if their suspicions were raised, they had “an express line to all the maternity wards”. “With one phone call they are able to tell us [if the child was born there] from the register.” The three women already have children, and they allegedly told officials that they wanted to benefit more from the child support grant increase. SA Social Security Agency (Sassa) spokesperson Paseka Letsatsi said the problem of ghost children had led to them embarking on review programmes aimed at verifying that the children who benefited from the child support grants actually existed. Letsatsi said because of a great deal of fraud involved in Sassa grants, hefty punishments were imposed on fraudulent recipients once caught.