The Department of Education in KwaZulu-Natal met with teachers’ unions on Thursday, hoping to reach consensus that will see all teachers in the province returning to work by Monday. Earlier this week, the provincial department led by MEC Kwazi Mshengu, who was locked in a meeting with Premier Sihle Zikalala yesterday, announced that teachers would resume work on Thursday. However, not all the teachers reported for duty as they heeded the call of five unions which had instructed them on Wednesday not to set foot at schools. The meeting comes soon after the unions lambasted the department for not working with them on their plans to reopen schools and for failing to get schools ready for both pupils and teachers. At Unobhala High School in Nkanyezini, which was visited by Finance MEC Ravi Pillay on behalf of Mshengu, five of the 15 teachers were absent. Education spokesperson in the province Muzi Mahlambi said they were aware some teachers didn’t report for duty, but they were doing everything to sort out the differences between the unions and the department. He said the department’s HOD was meeting representatives of teachers’ unions to discuss the issue of teachers not reporting for work based on a joint statement that was released by unions instructing their members not to report for duty. Sadtu is also unhappy with Mshengu for portraying their members as drunkards at the weekends during an interview with Ukhozi FM. “These are the same teachers who work hard during the very same weekends and holidays, teaching mostly without compensation.” Sadtu provincial secretary Nomarashiya Caluza said it was unfortunate that the same teachers who were insulted were “expected to wake up and soldier on to a majority of schools that are not safe and are non-compliant with Covid-19 measures”. Though MEC Mshengu denied saying teachers were drunkards, he has apologised for comments made during the interview. About his visit to Unobhala, Pillay said government was satisfied that most schools are ready for Grade 7 and 12 pupils and teachers. “The school has received all the required PPE for both staff and learners. “We think the PPE should be enough for at least a month,” said Pillay. “With regards to the attendance of educators, this school has a staff of 15 and we have nine of those 15 present at work today [Thurday]. One is on study leave and five are unaccounted for. We assume that’s part of the equation that I’m sure we are all familiar with, but we will deal with that matter provincially and nationally as we go along.” The SA Communist Party (SACP) in KZN has backed teacher unions in their stance against being sent back to school when the department has not provided essential requirements. “We believe that this enthusiasm and arrogance to frogmarch workers and the children into the deadly cocktail of winter, Covid-19, TB and HIV/Aids is informed by prospects of tenders which will come with the provision of some goods and services when schools re-open. We are already observing some unpalatable conducts by certain role-players demonstrating acts of desperation to get their fingers into the public purse in the wake of Covid-19 and its aftermath.” The DA, however, has called on for an urgent meeting between the KZN Education Department and teacher unions over their concerns about readiness, noting unions allege the schools visited on Thursady were “staged to look good and that they do not reflect the reality in the rest of the province”. DA provincial education spokesperson Imran Keeka said it has also raised its concerns about readiness. “All of these allegations must be tested. If verified, strong steps must be taken to hold those accountable for any lapse in upholding regulations. Equally, if unions’ claims are found to be unsubstantiated, there must be repercussions for those using this as an opportunity to yet again halt our children’s access to education,” Keeka said.