The Covid-19 lockdown will see the justice system reeling under unprecedented backlogs on top of the normal delays. And the general backlog is around 45 000 criminal cases at any given time, said advocate Glynis Breytenbach, the DA spokesperson for justice. “It is now increasing at an alarming rate, with no solution in sight since the courts will not function optimally for months to come. Access to courts is seriously limited, a matter of grave concern. Those matters that do make it to court appear to be immediately postponed to a date far in the future.” Court rolls are usually worked out at least six months in advance in both the lower and high courts, said retired state advocate Johan du Toit. He explained that sometimes cases can be postponed for even longer than that. He described the ripple effect of all criminal cases being adjourned as “frightening”. “New cases coming in will have to join the queue and the waiting period will be longer. This could affect how courts approach bail applications. That is, being more lenient in releasing an accused. It could result in more rape cases not being reported or not going to trial.” Witnesses could lose interest in cases because too much time is going by, and they could also move away. Du Toit added that where child offenders are concerned, the operation of the procedures in the Child Justice Act could become useless as the system is either not working or hardly functioning. Legal expert Pat Stilwell said that if the criminal courts are not functioning to capacity, then there could be a build-up of awaiting-trial accused. That means an ever-increasing number of inmates in the prisons, which are already overcrowded. He questioned what would happen when the prisons reach full capacity and can no longer accommodate any more inmates. “Will dangerous offenders be allowed to roam free simply because there is no place to hold them?” he asked. The delays also impact on the constitutional right of everyone to a speedy trial. While some civil cases will carry on, depending on the judge, others won’t. Stilwell said that a lot of these cases, other than family matters, are usually about money. A build-up of unresolved cases will inevitably cause delays in dispute resolution in the long run. “Consider a merchant who has sold goods to a retailer who doesn’t pay. If the merchant’s opportunity to recover the debt is delayed for too long, it will put pressure on his cash flow and could cause the collapse of the merchant’s business,” he said. Regarding unresolved family matters in court, Stillwell is of the opinion that there will be a massive increase in the number of people suffering from mental health issues brought on by the fact that their disputes will remain unresolved. “What about the single parent whose former partner stopped paying maintenance for children?” People embroiled in employment disputes will continue to suffer because they will have to wait until the CCMA re-opens before seeking legal redress. The same applies to people who have been unfairly dismissed, he added.