Msunduzi Municipality is still trying to locate the owner of the unusual and historical building at the corner of West and Boom streets, which was recently gutted by fire. It is believed the building belongs to a trust in Durban, municipal spokesperson Thobeka Mafumbatha said on Thursday. The building is also on the municipal list of derelict buildings that are supposed to be demolished. However, the legal processes still have to take place before it can be destroyed. Although it was unfit for occupancy, it was occupied by illegal dwellers at the time of the fire. These people are now being provided with shelter by the municipality, said Mafumbatha. The building dates back to the 1900s. Ros Devereux of Amafa said it was rated in 1986 for architectural significance, its contribution to the streetscape and to the townscape. “It was assessed to be over 80 years of age at the time — built prior to 1910. The enclosed balcony is not original and the enclosure was probably put up in the 1950s. “It was poorly constructed and had deteriorated significantly. “Should the building be able to be restored, the enclosure must be removed and the building investigated to ascertain how it should be replaced to restore the building to as close to the original as possible. The cast iron columns that were removed after they were damaged by a vehicle are apparently in the owner’s possession and can be reinstated,” said Devereux. The cast iron veranda columns indicate that it was probably built around the turn of the last century — late 1890s to 1910. However, it has been quite significantly altered and seems to have received a face brick skin after 1945. This could have been done because the original brickwork was failing. Some buildings were built of sun-dried or under-fired bricks that started to crumble later, said Devereux. If the building has to be demolished, Devereaux said a demolition permit would have to be obtained from the KZN Amafa and Research Institute, before any work is undertaken on site. “The feasibility of repair needs to be established before any suggestions as to its demolition or rehabilitation can be made.” Historical geographer Rob Haswell, who also wore many hats at the municipality, including municipal manager, said the building had been a danger for a long time. “I think it is time we look at all the buildings in the central area because what has happened now is that the area is having to provide accommodation for more people than what it was ever intended for before.” He added that there are also many vacant office blocks that can be used for accommodation. Back in the mid-80s, every single building in the central area was surveyed by the urban planning department under the late Brian Bassett, and a book was published. entitled The Buildings of Pietermaritzburg. “We evaluated every single building on the basis of architecture historically and how it fits with the neighbourhood buildings and the streetscape. On the basis of that we recommended to council 150 buildings worthy of conservation. These buildings were listed.” This meant that the buildings could not be demolished or altered without the special consent of council and there were other regulations regarding what could or could not be done. Equally important is that if the building was listed and needed repair, then the owner could apply to council for a rates rebate to help pay for the costs. Haswell added the building at the corner of West and Boom streets was in good condition at the time. “We said it’s an important historical building from an architectural point of view. It’s a great pity therefore that either the owner or council have in a way neglected this building and allowed it to be in a state now where it’s almost beyond repair.” Haswell believes the building should be rebuilt, keeping some of the features. “I think the only valuable architectural feature is the ornamental cast- iron veranda pillars, which were all imported.” Haswell suggested the building should be replaced with a modern building for residential purposes because there is a need for housing in the city. Perhaps Msunduzi’s housing association should step in, he added.