 More than 20 waste pickers were turned away from
the New England Road landfill site when they tried to return to work on Monday. The group said they thought the site management
would let them inside since Level 4 of the lockdown allowed for the recycling
of things such as plastic, glass and metal at a 50% capacity. Molihi Sekoati, who arrived from Lesotho three
years ago, said Msunduzi must liaise with the national government on the matter
of recyclers so that they are on the same page. She said many of them are foreign nationals who
could not collect social grants or food parcels. “It’s been difficult since the
lockdown but now I fear we might be without work for months and I really have
nothing to give to my children. If the borders were open I would actually go
back home because right now I can’t even pay rent,” she said. Nonhlanhla Mhlophe, a waste picker at the landfill
site and co-ordinator of the South African Waste Pickers Association (Sawpa),
said all the dumps around the country opened on Monday except
Pietermaritzburg’s. “Sawpa and groundWork wrote to the national
government before Level 4 was implemented and asked for recyclers to be
considered as an essential service and that was done, but Msunduzi has decided
to do something that is completely against the regulation.” She said she spoke to the landfill management after
they were turned away on Monday and they told her that waste pickers will only
be allowed inside the dump when the regulation is amended for Level 2 of the
lockdown. “Yes, we are desperate to return to work because of financial
constraints but we also provide an essential service that is critical to the
waste management in Msunduzi. If we were not there to recycle some of the
things there, that landfill site would have been full to capacity and probably
closed a long time ago, so why is Msunduzi acting like we don’t matter?” Mhlophe said what hurt them the most is that about
three of their colleagues were allegedly sneaked into the dump by officials who
work there. “It’s not fair.” groundWork’s Musa Chamane said Msunduzi’s actions
show that the City is undermining the waste pickers and does not care about
their rights. “If the municipality wants to get rid of the waste
pickers they must come out straight and say it instead of using this Covid-19
crisis as an excuse. “We fought for their recognition at national
government and Msunduzi must now adhere to the regulation.” Msunduzi spokesperson Thobeka Mafumbatha said the
dump cannot allow waste pickers to resume work yet. She said they will all be issued permits once the
City feels it is safe for them to return. “If there’s anyone inside the dump
they are there illegally.” 