There is cheer for punters as the Durban July will go ahead, albeit behind closed doors, but Comrades runners and Hilton festival-goers have had their hopes dashed as these events will not go ahead this year. Vodacom and Gold Circle confirmed on Thursday they are committed to run the July under the strictest Covid-19 regulations, and without spectators on course. Gold Circle CEO Michel Nairac said: “The Vodacom Durban July has enjoyed an uninterrupted history since first being run in 1897 — not even two world wars prevented the race from being run — and we are doing everything in our power to ensure that 2020 is not the exception.” The proposed date for the race is Saturday, July 25, but may be changed if circumstances demand. On Thursday, the Comrades Marathon Association (CSA) and Athletics South Africa (ASA) announced that the ultra-marathon had been officially cancelled after having initially been postponed. Well-known road running coach Norrie Williamson said the cancellation is terrible news, not just to athletes but to the economy of KZN. “Comrades is worth as much as R700 million to the province and we are going to need all those rands and dollars when this [lockdown] gets lifted.” Like Durban, Pietermaritzburg will take a knock economically. Msunduzi Municipality spokesperson Thobeka Mafumbatha said: “This is a big race which attracts people from all over the world, so it definitely going to affect us in terms of economy because people in the city they do benefit in terms of BnBs. In light of what’s happening, the Msunduzi Municipality will be affected.” Williamson added KwaZulu-Natal Athletics stood to lose between R2,7 to R3 million in broadcasting earnings from the SABC. After the announcement Comrades Marathon champion, Gerda Steyn, posted a blank sheet on her Twitter page and captioned it “Here’s my updated Race Calendar for 2020: #eish.” CMA said there will be no fee refund, but local entrants will receive their Comrades 2020 MrPSport runner’s T-shirt and goodie bag, as well as a Comrades badge and flash while all foreign entries will be deferred to Comrades 2021 and/or Comrades 2022. The director of the Hilton Arts Festival, Sue Clarence, said the lockdown and uncertainty around when people would be allowed to return to theatres and other arts venues had left them with little choice but to cancel. Clarence added: “There is no doubt that this is a wise move, but it is, nevertheless, a sad day. “Our thoughts are with all the actors, musicians, singers, theatre technicians, artists and crafters, few of whom are regular salaried people and many of whom had their source of income come to an abrupt end in mid-March.”