Mayor Xolani Duma’s viral video confirming Mpofana’s first Covid-19 case has the Bruntville community in a state of panic. In the clip that was posted on Facebook at the weekend, Duma said the case is in the Phumlas part of the township. He said the patient was going to be taken away by an ambulance while his family would go to a quarantine facility. “The clinic has compiled a list of relatives and visitors who frequented his home. This is a clear indication that some people were flouting the regulations by visiting him because there are 23 names on the list of those suspected to have had contact with him,” said Duma. He said there are suspicions that there are more people who may have come to contact with the patient before and after he was tested. “This case is in Phumlas but that doesn’t mean that people from other areas are safe because we don’t know where the other 23 people are from, who they live with or who they came into contact with.” Duma appealed to the people of Mpofana to respect the lockdown regulations and stop making social visits during this period as that puts them at risk of contracting Covid-19. He said President Cyril Ramaphosa implemented the lockdown as a means to prevent the spread of the virus but this requires people to stay at home. He said while Mpofana has only recorded one positive case so far; Msunduzi already had 27 cases and uMngeni was sitting at 25 at the weekend. “Please don’t take this virus lightly. Please protect yourself.” Duma’s announcement comes amid reports that Mooi River is among the towns where the flouting of lockdown regulations is rife as people are apparently often seen roaming the streets. On Monday Bruntville residents Senamile Ntshangase and Mbongeni Mhlongo told The Witness that most of the township residents have been in a state of panic since they saw Duma’s video. “It went viral over the weekend because everyone was sharing it on WhatsApp. “I think in a way it helped because most people were behaving as if Covid-19 would never affect them until they saw that video. “Even the boys that used to play soccer on the streets were not there yesterday [Sunday] so I think it got everybody scared.” She denied that she ever flouted the lockdown regulations herself but said she knows a lot of people who did, including those who live with her. “I guess no one is safe because you can behave and stay at home and still be exposed because of the people who live with you. Your life is really in other people’s hands.” Mhlongo said his wife woke him up from a nap on Saturday to show him Duma’s video. He said since then several people have shared it with him on WhatsApp. “Everybody was talking about it yesterday. Apparently it’s an old man that is sick and his family has already been relocated to a quarantine facility. “Everyone is scared that they might have come into contact with any of the 23 people that visited his house.” He said he had been mostly been only leaving home to go to work but he is still fearful. “I worry that I’ll be the one who brings this virus to my house because my wife and kids are always home and I’m the one who is interacting with the outside world.” Attempts to get comment for Duma and district Mayor Thobekile Maphumulo, who is the Covid-19 district command council co-chair, were unsuccessful. DA Political head in Mpofana Chris Pappas said the party is concerned about the mechanism put in place to limit the spread of Covid-19 and the capacity of the local institutions to handle the implementation of the regulations and the management of the state of disaster. “SAPS Mooi River do not have the capacity to enforce the regulations, nor do the local clinic and hospital have the capacity to test, track and trace at a rate that would enable the pandemic to be better managed,” he said. Pappas said the DA intends to engage with the relevant MECs “considering that there is no information emanating from the local joint operations committee”. — WR. Premier Sihle Zikalala said councillors are not allowed to make announcements about Covid-19 cases. He said the provincial government has noted this behaviour with concern as it borders on the violation of Covid-19 communication. “We wish to remind all councillors that only the national Department of Health and the minister can pronounce on new and confirmed statistics on Covid-19. We ask councillors to adhere to this protocol to avoid spreading fake news.” — WR.