Some of Pietermaritzburg’s streets will finally be lit up again, thanks to a grant from the Department of Mineral Resources and Energy. The City is using R8 million to replace more than 2 100 of its 20 000 street lights with light-emitting diode (LED) ones. Currently the focus is on access roads into the CBD and residential areas. Deputy Mayor Manilal Inderjit said the project will run parallel to another one to fix street lights that were vandalised, but there is separate funding for that. “The sentiment amongst some of our residents has been that we are not doing any repairs or maintenance of our street lights, which left them in the dark, but the plans have always been there, it was just a matter of sourcing funding and then appointing contractors,” he said on Thursday. The Witness has reported on the frustrations of ratepayers who fear being targeted by criminals as their streets were left in darkness for months, and even years, on end. There was also a spike in vandalism with copper thieves targeting the street lights. Msunduzi blamed a lack of funds for its failure to do the repairs. “Having LED lights comes with numerous benefits for both the municipality and the environment because it means we will be using less energy so our electricity bill will also go down,” said Inderjit. Senior electricity manager Ngangenkosi Mpisi said the LED lights also have a longer lifespan so the municipality will save on maintenance. He said Msunduzi intends to use every opportunity to apply for funding for energy efficiency management projects as it wants to have over 20 000 street lights converted to LEDs. Mpisi said the vandalism of the city’s electricity infrastructure continues to be a challenge. “It’s an ongoing battle and all we can do is to appeal to our communities to protect municipal infrastructure and report incidents of vandalism. If we all work together to ensure that copper thieves don’t interfere with our electricity infrastructure, we will have less outages,” Mpisi said.