Government has resolved to keep the ban on domestic and international flights in place despite the country moving into the lower risk Covid-19 Level, 4 which started on Friday. Briefing the media on Covid-19 Level 4 transport regulations on Friday, Transport Minister Fikile Mbalula said flights used for repatriation purposes would be allowed to operate to bring back South Africans stranded in foreign countries or transporting foreign nationals to their home countries. The movement of cruise liners remains banned. “Only vessels bringing in cargo are allowed to call on our ports,’’ he said. Minibus taxis, buses and e-hailing services would be allowed to operate from 5 am to 8 pm. However, Mbalula said public transport operators would only be allowed to operate if they observed Covid-19 precautions. “Sanitisation principles currently applicable to public transport vehicles and facilities remain. “No person is allowed to use public transport who is not wearing a face mask. We call on the pubic to ensure strict adherence to this requirement by obtaining their own face masks,” he said. While operators would be able to transport passengers across districts, metros and provinces, this would come to an end on May 7, the deadline given to people currently stranded in other provinces to return home. Loading capacity for minibus-taxis and buses would remain at 70%. “Loading capacity for metered taxis and e-hailing services remains at 50%. A five-seater vehicle is permitted to carry a maximum of two passengers and a driver,” Mbalula said. On rail transport, Mbalula said the department would allow the full resumption of freight rail. “Commuter rail will resume operations gradually on an incremental basis, based on the detailed plans submitted by the passenger rail operators,” Mbalula said. The Level 4 lockdown would also see driving schools and motor vehicle servicing businesses resuming operations. “Driver’s licence testing centres and vehicle testing centres will gradually re-open for essential service workers to renew their driver’s and vehicle licenses,” Mbalula said. Under Level 4 lockdown restaurants would be allowed to resume operations but only for home deliveries. “Delivery services such as Uber Eats, Mr Delivery and any other similar service are permitted to operate between 9 am and 7 pm only for delivery of food,” the minister said. He said government understood the inconvenience the regulations were causing to the general public. “We must never forget the reason we make these difficult choices in the first place — to preserve human life,” he said.