A shooting at the Msunduzi Municipality substation at Manning Avenue and Ohrtmann Road left one security guard dead and his wounded colleague fighting for his life on Saturday. The pair, who are contracted by Royal Security, were ambushed and robbed by unknown gunmen armed with rifles at about 6.30 pm. Three firearms belonging to the guards were allegedly taken during the attack. Royal Security declined to comment and referred all queries to the police. Municipal spokesperson Thobeka Mafumbatha said it is suspected that the attack happened during an alleged cable theft attempt. The dead security guard, in his late 30s, was shot six times, while his colleague (52) was shot twice in the hand and thigh. He was rushed to a city hospital where he is in a critical condition. “They were ambushed on Saturday evening as they began their shift. They were contracted to prevent tampering from illegal electricity theft. “The matter has been reported to the police and the circumstances surrounding this incident are under investigation,” said Mafumbatha. According to information, the guards were inside the site when they were approached by two men dressed in blue overalls. The Witness confidentially established that over 200 empty cartridges were found on the scene. Trevor Mark, of WPS Security, which responded to the scene along with Red Alert, said said the dead security officer’s bullet-riddled body was found a short distance away from where the shooting happened. The wounded security guard managed to press a panic button, prompting a response. “The surviving guard said there was no confrontation. They didn’t have a chance to retaliate, these men came in, held them up and just started shooting at them before fleeing on foot.” A security guard doing his rounds on foot a block away heard gunshots and rushed to the scene. “I can’t remember how many gunshots I heard, but it wasn’t a single shot,” said the guard. He was greeted by a gruesome sight when he ran into the site and found one of his colleagues lying in a pool of blood in the middle of the substation. “He was alive and tried to tell us what happened. Other people came to the scene and we all tried to help this man as he was losing a lot of blood,” the guard said. “We put tissues and bandages on the wound, but the blood was running profusely.” The Witness was not able to establish the name of the man who was killed.