Employees at Grey’s Hospital say they fear for their lives after a nurse tested positive for Covid-19. Following news of the case, nurses and other staff members are demanding that the hospital be shut down and fumigated to prevent the spread of the virus. The nurses have accused hospital officials of failing to follow appropriate policies in dealing with Covid-19 cases. A source at the hospital said the nurse last reported to work in the first weekend of this month. On Tuesday, all health practitioners who worked with the nurse were being tested. A health-care worker at the hospital, who did not want to be named, said he was concerned by the development. “I feel that proper protocols should be put in place. An ICU is a closed space and all workers, including doctors, nurses, cleaners and patients that could have been in contact should be tested, not just selected persons. We are putting our loved ones at risk by going home and possibly being asymptomatic carriers of the coronavirus. “The ICU should be temporarily closed for proper cleaning of all surfaces and equipment,” the source said. Workers said they were informed on Monday that the ICU nurse had tested positive and complained that only doctors and patients in that unit were swabbed. “The nurses want to be swabbed as well and quarantined if necessary, as that is in the National Institute for Communicable Diseases guidelines. Management said nurses are low risk because we had surgical masks on, and we must go home and come back to work.” The nurses said they were told to wear normal surgical masks and aprons. “Nurses provide care for patients 24 hours a day compared to doctors who just see the patient for a few hours.They should be prioritised. All staff members who came in contact with this colleague should be swabbed. It’s blatantly unfair. “They do routine swabbing for nurses but since this is a positive case, everyone must be swabbed. You need to protect your health-care workers so they can protect other people.” The nurses said the hospital management has said it will not close ICU because of its inpatients. They also complained that the hospital had drafted a policy for nursing staff to rotate caring for suspected Covid-19 cases. “To this day, that roster has not been put forward. All the suspect patients are being seen by the same nurses over and over again, which increases their chances of contracting the virus.” Last month, the Health Department launched disciplinary action against eight emergency medical services (EMS) employees at Grey’s Hospital who refused to assist a Covid-19 patient. Spokesperson for the KZN Department of Health Ntokozo Maphisa said: “In accordance with the law, the department does not confirm positive Covid-19 cases, as this is the sole preserve of the minister of Health. As a matter of principle, where a positive Covid-19 case has been identified, contact mapping and tracing has to be conducted, as well as the screening, testing, quarantining and isolation of people who have come into contact with the patient.” Maphisa said where necessary and warranted, the affected section of a health facility may be temporarily closed in order to allow for decontamination. “All of this is in line with infection control and prevention guidelines from the World Health Organisation.” He said the department is not aware of any shortage of PPE at this facility, and has put in place a highly effective mechanism to monitor stock availability and ensure adequate replenishment of it where necessary. “If such a shortage exists, staff are urged to immediately notify their immediate supervisors or managers. They may also inform management at district or head office level,” he said.