Shadow the missing ball pet python has been found and it turns out, she might have been in the house all along. Her seven-year-old owner, Paige, is ecstatic, her mum Megan Anderson said on Monday. The snake showed up in the family’s Hilton home at about 9.30 pm on Sunday. “Paige was coming downstairs and saw her on one of the stairs at the bottom of the staircase. “She said, ‘Oh, Shadow!’. I was in bed, I jumped out and sure enough there she was.” Anderson assumes the snake had been in the room she lives in, “but to be honest, we have absolutely no idea where she was”. “We have tipped this house upside down to find her. We have emptied bags, shoes, cupboards, drawers and even broken the ceiling to look for her.” Anderson said Paige was so happy when she saw her cherished pet that she burst out crying. She hugged Shadow “so tight”. That night, the little girl even battled to sleep and kept on telling her mum, “We found her” with a huge smile on her face. Paige simply loves animals, said her mum. “She has had rabbits, guinea pigs, fish, dogs and she would have everything else if I allowed it. She gets really attached to them and loves them like they are her babies, probably because she is the only child. I think she battled a lot while Shadow was missing. She was crying daily and I tried to tell her that there was a possibility that we might not find her but she did not accept that.” Anderson said Shadow is absolutely fine, besides being very cold. She is healthy and looks happy to be back in her enclosure. “We put her on her heating pad and she stayed there all night. I think she missed being warm. We are so relieved to have her back and so very thankful to all the lovely people who have phoned and messaged with their advice and thoughts of how to get her back and offers of assistance to look for her. Snakes are the very best at hide and seek.” When the docile snake to went missing last week, Anderson posted a desperate plea on Facebook asking anyone to look for her snake.