The first trial since the beginning of lockdown resumed in the Pietermaritzburg high court on Monday with former primary school counsellor Darren Goddard taking the stand. This, as social distancing and other Covid-19 regulations are being followed in court. Whoever enters the building has to fill out a form with their details and travel history and then their temperatures are checked. Parents of the boys Goddard is alleged to have raped or sexually abused were seated a few metres apart in the public gallery. Goddard is facing 15 counts in total — one of accessing child pornography, being in possession of child pornography, and the rest of sexual assault and rape. There are nine boys aged between five and 13 years old who have made damning allegations against him. At the time, Goddard was a school counsellor at a primary school in the city. Goddard’s testimony on Monday was general. He removed his mask when he testified so that he could be audible. His advocate, Shane Matthews, removed his mask and wore a shield so that he too could be heard. Goddard said that although he has a Master’s degree in psychology, he is not a psychologist because he never wrote the board exams. Goddard clarified that he was de-registered from the Health Professions Council of South Africa because he didn’t pay the fees. Also, he said he had no reason to continue being part of the council at the time. He said the post he subsequently got at the school, in 2011, was as a school counsellor and not a counselling psychologist. At first the position was half-day but by the end of the year it became a full-day job. The children he counselled were referred to him by teachers, at the request of parents or as a result of concerns which the teachers raised, he said. A form had to be completed by the teacher and given to him requesting his assistance. “There were occasions where a teacher would ask me to deal with a particular crisis as it was happening. I would normally communicate with the parents afterwards to inform them.” Goddard emphasised that he did not see children without the knowledge of their parents. Matthews referred him to photographs of his office and outside, and questioned him about these. One photograph showed a surveillance camera. Goddard said it was put up to monitor incidents of theft because thefts had occurred at the school. This particular camera recorded movement outside his office. The office was divided into two by a blue board. There were tables, a double couch, chairs and toys inside. Goddard confirmed that none of the photographs showed a safe. One of the boys had testified that there was a safe in the office in which Goddard kept a gun with bullets and a knife. Goddard said there is no evidence of holes in the walls or anything to suggest that there was ever a safe. He admitted that he put up a “do not disturb” sign outside his office so that children would not come into it for no reason or because they were just being inquisitive. “These intrusions would be highly destructive at times,” he said. His testimony resumes on Tuesday.