Some local business will not survive the government’s strict
lockdown to slow the spread of Covid-19. That’s the stark reality outlined by Melanie Veness, chief
executive officer of the Pietermaritzburg and Midlands Chamber of Business
(PMCB), who said companies, both large and small, had lost their income. Some employees have been retrenched or are facing possible
retrenchment, while others have had their salaries cut and have had to access
help from the Unemployment Insurance Fund’s temporary employee/employer relief
scheme. Veness said: “I can’t begin to put numbers on the effect
that the last five weeks has had, but some people have seen their income drop
to zero. “In normal times, small businesses have a lot of challenges,
often working month to month, but the lockdown has also hit large businesses,
who are finding it hard to operate in these tough economic circumstances “There is anger and despair across every sector and every
size of organisation; and some of them have told me they don’t think they will
make it.” Among the hardest hit are those in the hospitality sector,
where people running bed and breakfasts, hotels, restaurants, entertainment
venues and events, have been unable to operate since March 26. Under the new Level 4 phase of the lockdown some restaurants
will be able to do deliveries of food to customers until 7 pm. For the rest of the sector, however, there is no light at
the end of the tunnel. “It really is desperate times for hotels and BnBs in the
city and the Midlands, who can accommodate up to 20 000 people for large
events,” Veness said. “And the worst thing is that many of them cannot even claim
from the tourism relief fund, because of the black economic empowerment
criteria (BEE).” Solidarity and AfriForum challenged the Department of
Tourism but failed to get the courts to have the BEE criteria removed. “The tourism industry hasn’t transformed for the majority,
not for lack of trying. It’s just what we’ve got,” said Veness. “Ultimately
though what we all want is to save the tourism industry in our province,
regardless of who owns what. I think it was an unfortunate that the BEE
decision was taken at national level, because while many hotels and BnBs are
white-owned they employ a lot of people.” It’s this one-size fits all mentality which Veness finds
especially hard to accept. Using the manufacturing sector as an example, she
said that for many large companies working with just one-third of their normal
workforce makes no commercial sense and impacts on their ability to trade
competitively. She would rather the Department of Health worked with the
sector to arrange large scale testing of all workers and then allow all those
who are negative to work. Another issue is that no business operates alone. Instead
there is an inter-connected supply chain, in which larger firms rely on smaller
ones to provide parts and services. Larger firms, in turn, rely on logistics
companies and ships to get their goods to market. “You can’t pick and choose bits of the economy to open and
leave other sectors closed,” Veness said. “I do understand that blanket
legislation is easier for the government to manage, but there is simply no
flexibility at all at the Department of Trade and Industry at the moment.” Looking ahead, Veness said no-one can predict how long the
lockdown will last, with the government and its scientific advisors warning
that the peak of pandemic may only come in October. “So, the big question is: how can we safely allow some
changes to happen so that people stay healthy and we don’t decimate the
economy?,” she said. “It’s very difficult to know what’s going to happen and to
find that balance. That’s why we need to keep a close eye on where business is
at and why government needs to engage with all levels of the business community
and not just the large corporates.” GRANT SCHEME PLAN FOR SMMES Melanie Veness said the PMCB and other members of the KZN
Business Chambers Council were also concerned that most of the relief schemes
in place for small, medium and micro enterprises (SMMEs) involve businesses
taking out a loan “That’s why we are looking at creating a grant scheme for
small businesses,” she said. “People will have enough pressure to get going again without
having the additional burden of debt repayment. “We have approached a bank to help us with the scheme and we
hope we can try an fill the gap in funding relief. At the moment getting
funding is really difficult, especially if you are a sole proprietor or freelance
worker.” Businesses, meanwhile, have been trying to access different
relief schemes, including: • the government’s R200-billion loan scheme that is
being facilitated through South Africa’s bigger banks; • the SMME relief finance facility for existing businesses
which are distressed; • the SEFA-debt restructuring facility for SMMEs which are
already funded by the Small Enterprise Funding Agency; • the business growth and resilience facility; and • the Industrial Development Corporation’s R3 billion
funding for vulnerable firms.