Student accommodation owners say they are feeling the pinch of the lockdown as the economic crisis deepens. Universities have closed over Covid-19 concerns, but for landlords relying on fees to support their operating revenue, not getting any rent payments has been devastating. Rickesh Maharaj of the KwaZulu-Natal Student Housing Association (KZNSTHA) said while government had appealed to industry leaders not to invoke the legal doctrine of “force majeure” in the hope that it will absolve them of their obligations for a particular contract for the period of the lockdown, that is the stance universities have taken. “That has thrown the entire student accommodation sector, which is still in its infancy stage. “There are small to micro businesses who have ploughed in life savings to get a foothold in this industry, which is much needed to service our communities.” Maharaj said accommodation owners cannot meet their fixed expenses and overheads. “There are bonds which they have to service. The rates on their properties still stand. The municipalities have not waived the utility bills. The insurance on the properties and security costs still stand.” He said owners have had to double up on security. “The keys of the properties are still with the students. Their personal belongings are still in the properties and we have to safeguard them. “Our members are sitting with all these huge costs and no income to service it.” Maharaj said the association, which represents more than 90 owners from across the province, is advocating for the rights of its members and drawing up new lease agreements. Maximillian Lekgatle, who accommodates 90 students in Scottsville, said: “We are going to see a lot of properties being repossessed. With the new way of life and social distancing regulations, it will cripple the market. Most residences are designed for students to share. Our properties were valued on the assumption that we can have three students.” Another Pietermaritzburg landlord, who asked not to be named, said some universities have said that “if there is no student, they won’t pay”. “The university specifically asked us to secure the students’ belongings. In essence, the universities are still in occupation because the students even took away the keys. “The president said all tenants must pay the rent in the circumstances that they can. The universities have received money from the financial aid scheme, but they are not paying.” The landlord, who accommodates about 550 students, added: “It’s devastating. It impacts on the employees and the service providers. If I’m not getting paid, I can’t pay anyone. It’s a dire situation.” Wonder Shange, another accommodation owner, said he had not received a single rental payment. “The students continue to get the monies paid into their accounts but we’re not receiving a single cent. Our expenses stand but we’re not getting a single cent. The students get funds based on lease agreements they signed with us. “If anything happens to their belongings, we will be held accountable, but they are not even paying. What will happen when we say that we will not accept any student until the outstanding rental has been paid?” he said. Sfiso Zondi, who has contracts with students and not the university, said his hands were tied as he cannot take any legal action. “Students have nothing to lose. Although I have lease agreements with them, taking legal action would be a waste of time. I’m basically at their mercy.” Zondi told The Witness he has only received rent for one month from the students he is housing.