The Bruntville man whom the Mpofana mayor had claimed was Covid-19 positive, had yet to be tested when the mayor disclosed his status on social media. In an interview with The Witness on Tuesday Kuphela Mbanjwa (64) said Mooi Mpofana Municipality health workers had only interviewed him about his state of health. “They asked me whether I recently visited Durban and when I told them that the last time I visited Durban was four years ago, they insisted that I was infected since I was constantly coughing. “The following day they then took me to Grey’s Hospital in Pietermaritzburg where it was confirmed that I don’t have any Covid-19 virus,” he said. Mbanjwa was discharged from Grey’s on Monday after spending a week there. Although mayor Xolani Duma did not mention Mbanjwa by name in the video which went viral, the Bruntville community became aware that the mayor was referring to Mbanjwa as local health workers escorted by police had visited him at his home. “They created a big scene and as a result of the inaccurate information they sent out about me the entire community is now talking about me. To make matters worse the health officials also attempted to remove my entire family from the house, saying they should be quarantined somewhere far away from the community. “Since I was discharged from Grey’s Hospital, I have been at home waiting for the mayor and his officials to come and apologise. So far no-one has come to see me,” he said. Mbanjwa, who lives with his six children, said his neighbours still looked at him with suspicious eyes. “I spend most of the time seated on the veranda and I can see people passing on the streets pointing fingers at my house. At times I think that someone might harm me because not everyone is aware that what the mayor told them was actually a lie,” he said. A retired farm worker, Mbanjwa said he was also waiting for an update from the local police where he lodged a formal complaint against Duma. “They told me that the station commander would be in touch with me to update me on the progress of the case. But up to today, the station commissioner has not contacted me,” he said. The police station was closed for a day to be sanitised after it emerged that officers at the station had interacted with Mbanjwa and his family members when they visited the facility to lay charges against Duma. Duma is yet to respond to media queries sent to him around the Mbanjwa matter. The mayor could also not be reached on his cell phone.