Msunduzi is once again wrangling over cemetery space as the urgency of the Covid-19 pandemic takes hold. They are re-looking at longstanding plans to commission two new cemeteries, at Hollingwood and eThembeni, to address the shortage of burial space and prevent a “catastrophe”. Acting general manager, Mbongeni Mathe, on Tuesday submitted a report to the executive committee which revealed that the situation has reached a crisis stage and that the council can no longer drag its feet on the matter, which has been mooted by council as far back as 2016. “A further delay in the commissioning of a new cemetery will ... be an indictment on the failure of the municipality to provide services,” read the document. Senior manager for recreation and facilities Mandla Zuma said, “As infections rise, Msunduzi must be able to respond to this ... Mountain Rise Cemetery is [already] filled to capacity,” he said. It is estimated that preparing Hollingwood for burials, including widening the New England Road and drilling boreholes, will cost R13,3 million while the 20 hectares for eThembeni Cemetery will see the City spending R7,8 million. Hollingwood alone would have space for approximately 50 000 graves. Ntuthuko Ntshangase asked Mathe to provide clarity on how the two sites were identified as eThembeni is prime property and at some point the land was deemed fit for residential development. He said there might be a sentiment that Hollingwood is more suitable for burials. The Witness previously reported on sludge deposits and toxicology issues on the Hollingwood land, which dented the plans for the 1 000-unit RDP housing development that was meant for the site. Zuma said the City as being held to ransom in its attempts to commission Hollingwood Cemetery by the surrounding community of Sobantu, due to their demands for a housing development there. He added that council must release the toxicology report. The eThembeni land was initially purchased by the KZN Department of Human Settlement for housing development and transferred to Msunduzi. On day, the general manager for sustainable development, Felix Nxumalo, told the executive committee there will still be enough land left for a housing development next to the new cemetery. He said this will be a mixed-use development to accommodate social and low-cost housing. Chair for the community services portfolio committee, Linda Madlala, said he is concerned the applications for grant funding from government departments might cause further delays to the projects. “We are dependent on council to make funding available with immediate effect ... because the situation might be catastrophic if we don’t respond with immediate effect,” said Mathe. Mayor Mzimkhulu Thebolla asked Mathe and Nxumalo to also prepare a report to update the exco on the Foxhill Lamontvalle Farm in Bisley, which was meant to provide Msunduzi with space for hundreds of graves. The property has been subject to controversy since Msunduzi bought it at an inflated cost three years ago. The former city manager, Sizwe Hadebe, was blamed for the questionable deal, but he had denied allegations that he misled council. Thebolla said the city should not be facing a crisis when land was available for burials.