The payment social grants was again marred by chaos and queues on day as many claimants ended up not being paid while others received duplicate payments. Massive queues snaked across Pietermaritzburg’s streets as thousands of pensioners and people living with disabilities stood for hours in the cold waiting for their payouts. The queue outside the main Pietermaritzburg Post Office on Langalibalele Street stretched 400 metres to Buchanan Street, and those waiting told The Witness they were hungry, cold and sore. The lines were just as long outside banks and supermarkets where grants could be collected. The Covid-19 regulations were largely ignored by the groups as they stood packed close in the queues and with the majority not wearing masks. Some, like gog’Ntombizezulu Zulu (76) from Esigodini, went home without their money as they found their accounts empty. She said the teller who was assisting her told her that there was a glitch in the system so she must wait until the afternoon or come back on Tuesday. “I got to town around 4 am. I’m hungry and I’m cold so I rather go back home than wait for something that might not come today,” she said. Zulu, like many others, had hired a car to bring her to the CBD so that she could join the queue before it got too long. Pietermaritzburg Pensioners Forum’s gog’ Doreen Taylor said there were dozens of cases similar to Zulu’s and some beneficiaries received only half of the money due to them. “People have reached a point of desperation because they ran out of food weeks ago and now they’ve had to go home empty-handed and then spend more money tomorrow hiring cars to bring them to town again.” She said hiring cars was meant to help reduce the amount of time spent on payout queues because the pensioners still had to go shopping for groceries after receiving their grants. “You have to queue to get your grant, queue outside the supermarket because they only allow a limited number of people inside, queue to buy electricity tokens and then queue to take a taxi home because the taxis only take about 10 people at a time,” she explained. HEALTH FEARS Taylor described Monday’s situation as chaotic and a huge health risk for the pensioners as it was not only cold but there was also no social distancing and many did not wear masks nor cover their faces with scarves. “For us this is a nightmare coming true because we raised all of these in the letter we wrote to President Cyril Ramaphosa a few weeks ago but our pleas were ignored. The sad part is that if we contract Covid-19, our grandchildren will also get it because they live with us,” she said. The health fears were shared by many, including neighbours gog’ Lindeni Xaba and gog’ Sibongile Ngidi from KwaPata. Xaba said she heard on the news that the elderly are vulnerable to Covid-19 and more likely to die from its complications. “I would leave the queue if I could but I can’t because I need my grant money. I took a loan to pay for transport this morning so if I don’t get paid I can’t go home,” she said. The pair said they left home at 2 am and hired a car to bring them to town at R100 per person. They said they had not had anything to eat and only drank tea so that they could take their medication for their chronic illnesses. “I’m sitting here because I’m can’t stand anymore, my legs and my back hurts. I’m also hungry and I can’t even afford to buy an apple from the vendors because I have no money,” said Ngidi. Meanwhile, News24 reported that approximately 435 000 social grant beneficiaries in the Western Cape received duplicate payments. SASSA SA Social Security Agency (Sassa) spokesperson Paseka Letsatsi told The Witness the system glitch that caused the delays had been sorted by the afternoon. “We are not sure yet what caused the glitch. It could be the several pop-ups that we had, like the increase in the grant amounts, but it’s been sorted now and everyone will get their money tomorrow. We profusely apologise for the inconvenience caused.” He said the agency will be entering into agreements with those who recieved more money than was due to them so that it can be paid back. Letsatsi was not anticipating any system problems in the coming days but conceded that the alleged flouting of lockdown regulations is a concern that needs urgent attention. He said Sassa recently had meeting with the retailers and the Post Office to discuss the matter, but people still did not practise social distancing , even when told to do so by queue marshals. Meanwhile, social grants beneficiaries who needed to have their cards replaced also flocked to the Pietermaritzburg Post Office, making the situation even more chaotic as they also stood in a separate long queue. They said they needed their cards replaced by tomorrow so that they could collect their grants then. The problem, they said, is that Sassa’s offices will only open on May 11, so the only option they have until then is the Post Office. Mother of three Nomfundo Sokhela said she left France before 5 am to join the queue. “I didn’t get my children’s grant last month because I lost my card and the Sassa offices have been closed since the lockdown started [in March]. “If I don’t get my card today I won’t get the money again,” she said. She said their queue had not been prioritised because the tellers were attending the pensioners and the disabled. “We are also desperate for help because our children are hungry and we need to buy them winter clothes.” 