Independent scholar transport providers in the province have accused the provincial government of “ducking and diving” their concerns. The drivers, known as omalume (uncles), have told The Witness that efforts to have discussions with the provincial Transport and Education departments before schools reopen on June 1 have been unsuccessful. Speaking to The Witness on Tuesday, chairperson for the KZN Scholar Transport Association Mandla Mvumbu said drivers in the 214 associations across the province are in distress as they have no PPE. “Our drivers are cash-strapped. We have not been provided with any personal protective equipment for the pupils we will be transporting. Nothing has been said in terms of how they will orient us once the pupils are back at school on Monday,” Mvumbu said. On Sunday, Premier Sihle Zikalala said KZN has a total of 470 buses, 30 minibuses and 164 minibus taxis operating in the province to transport children. Zikalala said all scholar transport operators have been engaged and are ready to commence operations in accordance with all the Covid-19 regulations. “Chief amongst these is ensuring the implementation of social distancing, which will have to be strictly ensured at all times. Added to this, we will monitor that the transport is disinfected on a regular basis. All scholar transport will have detergents such as sanitisers,” Zikalala said. Responding to this, Mvumbu said: “The premier was speaking about the government scholar transport. No one has said anything to us. As we speak, our members are stressed because they have been left out in the cold. It’s strange because 75% of vehicles that transport children to school are privately owned.” He said the Transport Department has only asked the association to provide a list of all permitted drivers. “We’re being told that the Department of Education should provide us with sanitisers, but they, too, are ducking and diving. The date is out for reopening, but no one wants to speak to us. We have tried to have meeting with them to no avail.” Mvubu said drivers were also not happy about the 70% capacity loading rule. “We want government to subsidise the remaining 30%. As it is, most of the parents who have also been under lockdown will not be able to pay us on June 1 so we can fuel up. The industry has suffered immensely, and we want government to at least meet us halfway. “Two months is a long time without any form of income. Most of the drivers are still paying car instalments and the past two months have been difficult but all their expenses still stand.” He added that a grant would help drivers who are on the brink of losing their only source of income. Phendula Ndlovu, an operator in Pietermaritzburg, said he would turn up for work because he had no other means of income. “The 70% is not practical, we don’t even qualify for UIF. You can’t expect us to operate in the same manner as normal taxi. With a limited number of children going back to school, I’m not even sure if I’ll make money for petrol,” said Ndlovu. “Very little is done to assist us, but we are still expected to fully comply with the regulations. We transport children to public schools and surely their lives should also be a priority and government must ensure that they have the necessary PPE.” Sihle Ndlovu, who transports pupils from Elandskop, said the early closure of schools put brakes on his earnings. He said his minibus taxi has been gathering dust for over two months. “I understand that only grade 7 and 12 pupils will be heading back to school next month. I don’t transport any pupils in these grades, which means I have to remain at home. “It is going to be very strenuous for me because we don’t operate like taxi drivers and collect money per trip, daily. We receive our wages monthly,” said Ndlovu. In response to questions on the plight of the association, the Transport Department referred The Witness to the statement made by Zikalala at the weekend.