The Department of Basic Education’s decision to resume
school for grades 7 and 12 on June 1 and a possible phased-in approach for the
other grades has left many parents looking for alternative education avenues. Options include home schooling and online schooling.
Home-schooling involves the parent taking full-time responsibility for the
schoolings and either doing the teaching themselves or enlisting tutors while
in online schooling — also known as virtual school — teachers manage the
student’s studies from afar within a structured curriculum. According to South African law, any child under the age of
15 has to attend school in some form. If you would like to home-school your child, the Department
of Basic Education requires a parent to apply to the head of the provincial
education department to register their child for home education. They must
provide a full copy of the curriculum they wish to follow and all lessons must
fall within the scope of compulsory education phases (foundation grade 1-3;
intermediate (grades 4-6; and senior grades 7-9). Applications can be done electronically with forms available
on the department’s website. The application requires a parent to submit
previous reports, immunisation cards, weekly timetables, breakdowns of terms
per year that must include 196 teaching days per year and the learning
programme. This application can take up to 30 days to be processed but is free. Curriculums are available from the Department of Education
and from the South African Home-schooling Association. After your child has registered for home-schooling parents
must keep compulsory records such as an attendance register, portfolio of the
child’s work, progress reports, evidence of continuous assessment, tests and
examinations conducted, evidence to show at the end of grades 3, 6 and 9,
whether the child has achieved outcomes for the grades. The chairperson of SA Homeschoolers, Bouwe van der Eems,
said they have been overwhelmed with calls ever since the minister’s
announcement earlier this week. He said at the beginning of the year, there were more than
150 000 home learners but since lockdown he estimates that figure will have
“exploded”.  Van der Eems urged the
department to introduce a new method to allow parents to register more quickly
to enable pupils to get on with the curriculum. He urged parents to educate themselves on home-schooling
before deciding to register their children. “The most important thing is to find and choose a
home-schooling approach that suits your needs and that of the child’s. Another
important factor is to join home-schooling groups and to attend as many events,
webinars to gather information beforehand,” said Van der Eems.