South Africa’s restaurant industry has spent the last eight weeks on its “hands and knees begging for government relief”. Now industry body the Restaurant Association of SA (Rasa) says they have no option but to look out for themselves. Before the country went into lockdown many businesses tried to keep going by allowing fewer patrons into their restaurants and instituting strict hygiene protocols. On March 27, however, they all had to shut their doors. Earlier this month, Leandra di Carlofelice-Carcary, owner of the Artisan Cafe in Hilton, joined other restaurants in Maritzburg and the Midlands who decided to open a delivery service under the lockdown level 4 regulations. “There are two sides to doing this,” she said. “Financially it’s not really touching sides. The little we get in doesn’t really cover the costs involved. “On the other hand, you have to keep your brand alive.” Other local restaurants going the delivery route are: Fern Hill Hotel’s Snooty Fox Restaurant, Tumble Downs on the Curry’s Post Road, Taste of Thai in Hilton, Crossways Hilton, The Farmer’s Daughter and The Treatery at Yard 41 in Howick, Pizzology Wood-Fired Pizza, Tea on 23 and Coffeeberry Cafe in Pietermaritzburg. Wendy Alberts, chief executive officer of Rasa, applauded her members for being proactive, but said ultimately income from deliveries is just not enough for restaurants to be sustainable. Instead the association is appealing to government to allow members to have contact-less kerbside collection for deliveries. “It’s imperative that we are able to have collections as well as deliveries. The margins are simply not enough to sustain the restaurants’ financial model and we continue to go on because the relief is simply not there; not for the staff and the operational costs. “Kerb-side collections as a worldwide trend are working in the rest of the world perfectly, and there’s no reason for us not to be considered,” she added. One person who has decided the delivery model is not for him is Gregg Oosthuizen, owner and chef at Sagewood at the Blackwoods Centre. “We did open for a delivery service on Mother’s Day, but we’re not known as a delivery restaurant and business is not great at the moment,” he added. Oosthuizen is opting instead to create an online marketing platform through which he can showcase Sagewood’s food and the artisanal producers and suppliers who work with them. Oosthuizen has also created a range of frozen meals, which can be bought at the Pick n Pay at Athlone Circle Centre. “I’m trying to find a way to make my business sustainable for my staff and my community,” Oosthuizen said, adding that he was feeling inspired about his vision for the business’ future. “We have had so much support from the community, so for now we’ll have an online space to sell our products and that will keep us going until people are allowed to come back and enjoy a sit-down meal,” Osthuizen added. Di Carlofelice-Carcary is also looking to diversify, with plans to launch a range of deli offerings and real Italian frozen meals, which people can heat up at home. “In some ways it’s been exciting to have time to plan new things. I believe that if we can get through this we will emerge stronger on the other side,” she said. Rasa is also trying to help companies survive in the long-term. The organisation is speaking to Merchant Capital about setting up a relief scheme which their 7 000 members will be able to access to pay rent and staff salaries. They are also appealing to some of the big suppliers in the sector, including Bidfoods and Coca-Cola, to give back to the industry by donating goods that can be used to create food parcels for staff. RELIEF FUND ASSISTS 32 EATERIES The Restaurant Relief Fund, developed by Eat Out owner New Media, is currently assisting 32 restaurants in seven provinces, helping them make over half-a-million meals in May. Just a few days into the Covid-19 lockdown, it was clear that eating out wouldn’t be the same for a long time. Then, as the number of hungry people increased under lockdown, Eat Out saw many cooks and restaurateurs step in to use their skills to help. The Restaurant Relief Fund, which is being run in partnership with Community Chest, provides financial aid to restaurants making meals for those in need and has enabled people to go back to work. New Media chief executive officer Aileen Lamb said: “We want this fund to keep our beloved industry operating and provide much-needed financial assistance so they can reopen their doors as viable businesses when the time comes.” New Media and Media24 seeded the fund with R500 000, and Retail Capital and Graham Beck/Steenberg Vineyards came on board, each donating R100 000. Those who wish to help can donate at www.help.eatout.co.za. COFFEEBOX BREWS BY THE RULES While the opening of drive throughs is not allowed amid the national lockdown, the city’s drive through coffee shop says it can trade under lockdown regulations.Amid questions about why Coffeebox at Athlone Circle was continuing with its operations, owner Con Malherbe told The Witness on Monday he sought a legal opinion on the shop’s right to trade.“The opinion received, with which we agree, is that Coffeebox falls within Part E Category 1 of Table 1 to the Regulations. Coffeebox does not fall within the definition of a restaurant or café as it does not prepare any hot or cold foods upon its premises. Coffeebox trades solely in food products and non-alcoholic beverages and is accordingly permitted to trade,” Malherbe said.He said Coffeebox adheres to all prescribed social distancing requirements to ensure the safety of its patrons. Malherbe said that should any persons or parties attempt to interfere with Coffeebox’s right to trade,its attorneys “hold instructions to approach the high court on an urgent basis in order to seek the appropriate interdictory and declaratory relief”.