More than 240 South Africans stranded in India for more than two-and-a-half months since lockdown have issued a plea to the government to assist in repatriating them. The Department of International Relations and Co-Operation (Dirco), however, cannot commit to a plan of action for the repatriation and has asked all those in India to ensure their names are registered at the South African mission office. Spokesperson Lunga Ngqengelele said the department was “working on a plan”. Pravieena Naidoo, whose 76-year-old mother and 69-year-old aunt are stranded in Tirupati, Andra Pradesh, has been liaising with government for their return. She has since formed an alliance with South African businesspeople stuck in Mumbai and they have become part of a WhatsApp group with more than 240 South Africans stuck in India. The group has started a petition that now has more than 3 500 signatures to it from people wanting their loved ones to be brought back home. They have also been in contact with a senior Dirco official who has committed to engaging with relevant South African and Indian officials locally and expects an update today. “The most critical thing that our government has failed to do was reassure our loved ones in India and the families here at home that everything was being done to get them back, and this needs to be addressed urgently,” said Naidoo. Pietermaritzburg’s Mohamed Shaik (68) has been in India since February for his late sister’s death ceremony. He was due to return on March 15 but was stranded at the airport as result of a problem with his visa. His bags were taken off the plane at the last moment and he had to return to his late sister’s home. When he eventually managed to get another visa, he was not permitted to travel as India was already in a lockdown. Shaik said he was depressed and missing his family. India’s scorching heat, he said, was unbearable. Seventy-one-year-old Noorjehan Parekh, who journeyed to the country for medical treatment in Gujerat on March 5, has been stranded there. Her son, Althaf Parekh, who runs a business in the CBD, said they relocated from India in 1991 but his mother preferred her medical treatment in India. But now, he said, she was running out of medical supplies — especially her insulin — as her prescription was not valid there and she had no access to a doctor or pharmacy in the village she stays at because of the lockdown. “I have had to make arrangements with people for her to stay with them. Although she is comfortable, it is not home. She is staying in a rural village. They can only leave the house during the mornings to see a doctor. The nearest doctor is more than six hours away. She cannot get a prescription for her insulin. The pharmacy is another two hours away. She has gone without insulin now for about a month. We pray she is safe,” said Althaf. Marilyn Cox, the former managing director of the Brookdale Health Hydro in the KZN Midlands, and her daughter Gemma (19), the 2019 head girl at Pietermaritzburg Girls’ High, have also been in India for more than two months. Gemma had gone to Rishikesh as part of her gap year to learn yoga and has a one-year study visa, while Marilyn had accompanied her for two-and-a-half weeks. Cox said she was grateful that they had each other, safe and that they could call home often, but while enjoying their experience at a yoga ashram, “our financial and emotional health is taking strain now and we need a flight home”.