Dizziness, breathing difficulties and headaches are some of
the drawbacks of wearing a mask for prolonged periods or wearing the incorrect
type. University of KwaZulu-Natal Professor Rajen Naidoo said if
people are using something that’s strapped to their head which is firm and
tight, just that will cause headaches. However, if people are using masks in an appropriate way and
as advised, they would not be experiencing headaches or any dizziness. “That
should not happen unless the person for example has extremely poor lungs in the
first instance. We know that they are likely to experience difficulty in
breathing.” He said to the best of his understanding no one is
recommending that you use a specific cloth mask for say six hours straight.
Masks should be changed after a certain period of time because they do become
contaminated with perspiration. Using a mask for six hours straight will cause
irritation, depending on how it’s strapped on because the elastic pulling may
cause headaches. “If you have normal healthy lungs and the mask is not soggy
and wet then there should be no reason why you should be experiencing any
dizziness or symptoms such as that.” When it comes to children, and what’s going to happen when
they go back to school, the professor said: “We need to start thinking about
what’s most appropriate for them to be wearing. At this point in time, I can
see no reason for them to be in public places.” Children can be very fidgety which makes wearing a mask for
them problematic. Occupational therapist, Tania Darch, said wearing a mask
makes children want to scratch their faces more often. “Children are impulsive
and they might take their masks off when they shouldn’t.” Darch added that children who are going back to school
should start being conditioned to wear a mask so they know what it feels like. She suggested that children should wear it for about an hour
at home to make it easier for them to cope while at school. “Another option is
to wear a face shield if your child struggles with a face mask. Kids with
asthma will definitely struggle with face masks”. While wearing a mask is mandatory, police spokesperson
Brigadier Vishnu Naidoo said a person will not be fined or arrested for not
wearing one. “However, the person can be denied access to certain places like
malls, for instance”. The Department of Health has recommended that the design of
fabric masks should be mindful of the thermo-physiological properties of
fabrics. If wrongly chosen, this can lead to problems like skin irritation, the
build-up of heat or moisture, or the incubation of bacteria etc. It may cause
wearers to take off masks in situations when they should otherwise be wearing
them. The department said masks must be breathable. Should the
mask prevent one from breathing easily, this will present a serious danger to
the health of the wearer — not only from becoming oxygen deprived but also
because the mask will promote risky behaviour like the need to touch the face
and remove or adjust the mask during wear, increasing the risk of transmission
of the virus. Masks must be designed to fit properly and be comfortable to
wear. 