The district’s business community, academics and government are coming together in an innovative campaign that is hoped to restart the local economy to pre-Covid-19 levels. The “Vus’ Indlovu” (Awaken the Elephant) campaign is aimed at addressing the economic damage — in both the formal and informal sectors — caused by lockdown which has left many businesses counting the costs. The uMgungundlovu Economic Development Agency together with National African Federated Chamber of Commerce and Industry (Nafcoc) as well as the Pietermaritzburg and Midlands Chamber of Business and Tourism (PMCB) have called the residents to participate in “Vus’ Indlovu”. The campaign is looking for inputs from all sectors including agriculture, information technology, healthcare civil society, the creative arts and the youth. Platforms for engagement have been set up for all role-players to make their contributions. “Thus far we have interviewed more than 250 informal and SMME enterprises with a view to better understanding their needs and planning for mitigating interventions to support them. But we will be going beyond that and extending the reach of this campaign across the business landscape, to include our professionals and cornerstone large operations,” said Mayor Thobekile Maphumulo of uMgungundlovu district. She said Vus’ Indlovu has attracted 16 academics from various disciplines at the University of KwaZulu-Natal who have offered their support and will make invaluable contributions to the innovations they are looking for. PMCB chief executive Melanie Veness said: “While we recognise the various challenges facing our business community, and they remain a priority, we will also be focusing on new opportunities and possibilities with specific and implementable initiatives. “We know the potential of this region and we believe that this hardship presents an opportunity for us to pull together and identify specific areas where we can make an impact and reset the economy back on track.” The campaign launches today with online engagements for the various sectors from where inputs will be considered by all the role-players, including civil organisations, municipalities and provincial government departments. This will result in a “high-impact” implementation plan that will be shared with the citizens of the district and to which the campaign champions will be held accountable. Former Msunduzi mayor and city historian, Rob Haswell, applauded those behind the initiative, saying it could unleash uMgungundlovu district’s potential as one of the major players in the country’s economy. He said the district is already in a strategic location as it sits on the N3 which connects eThekwini and the Durban port with Gauteng. “I’m glad that the youth is also going to be involved in this campaign because they can tell us what kind of future they see for their city. It’s no good saying we have all these great schools here yet people leave as soon as they matriculate because of the lack of economic opportunities that interest our young people like social media.” Haswell said the contributors must remember that municipal boundaries on the map are not economic boundaries so they must think beyond just Msunduzi and uMgungundlovu. “This is an opportunity to change the direction of our city, district and even province.” Campaign convener James Martin can be contacted on jamesmartin@wol.co.za for the schedule and links for the relevant meetings.