The national lockdown has left both tenants and shopping mall landlords in uncharted waters. Many stores remain closed under the lockdown regulations, foot traffic is down and the only businesses making any money are supermarkets, pharmacies and other companies providing essential services. To ensure that property owners aren’t left with empty retail spaces and small businesses from going under, landlords and tenants in Pietermaritzburg and the Midlands have chosen to work together. Grant Elliott, spokesperson for the Mall at Scottsville, said they were attempting to navigate through the situation together with their tenants. “We held a number of discussions with them regarding their ongoing rent obligations, offering them potential deferral, discounts and/or restructuring of rent. “As part of the Property Industry Group, the sector’s unity front, we are committed to the provision of an industry-wide assistance and relief package for retail tenants that are hardest hit by the lockdown. The measures focus principally on supporting affected SMMEs while also providing relief and assistance to all the other affected retail tenants. “This off course does not replace our willingness to talk to tenants on a case to case basis,” he added. At the Cascades Centre, management has also offered tenants rental relief packages. “Offers were made to tenants based on the best of our ability as we are not a huge property management company and we still need to sustain life,” spokesperson Michelle Chinnu said. “We are also assisting tenants who are trading as foot traffic and business as a whole is slow. We are taking this one step at a time based on how the government proceeds with the different levels. Ashley Hesse, from Cenprop (Pty) Ltd, which runs the St John’s Village Life­style Centre in Howick, said the company had assisted most of the tenants. “We had three shops operating in level five lockdown, namely the pharmacy, Pick n Pay and a health shop — all essential services. “A few more opened up under lockdown four two weeks ago with the necessary permits,” he added. Hesse said each tenant was made an offer in terms of the rental relief guidelines and nature of their business. “This was only done on rentals, not operating costs and utilities like electricity and water,” Hesse said. “Once our offer was accepted, we credited each tenant’s account with the discount offered for April and May. “We plan to revisit this come month-end going into lockdown three. We have already received a request for a further two months’ help from one tenant.” The city’s biggest centre, Liberty Midlands Mall, which forms part of the Liberty Two Degrees Ltd group, made a decision at the end of March to be proactive about the impact the Covid-19 pandemic would have on its business. In a statement the company added: “We continue to pragmatically engage our tenants with the aim to try and retain tenancies within the portfolio on sustainable commercial terms. “Rental collections based on full amounts due and before any discounts totalled 38,2% in April. May collections have since increased with 43% of current billing being received as at May 18 and we expect this to significantly increase as we close out negotiations with tenants that are now trading.” Asked what kind of impact the lockdown had on St John’s Lifestyle Centre, Hesse said it wasn’t just his centre but rather the whole retail sector that had taken a major knock. “I personally don’t see it improving into the future,” he added. “A lot of our tenants are not nationals and during this lockdown period we have had three casualties. Stores closed that won’t reopen. We may even see other casualties when we move to lockdown three.” On a more positive note, he said he’d also had inquiries from prospective tenants who are thinking of relocating their current stores in Howick and on the Midlands Meander because of the sharp decline in foot traffic. Liberty Two Degrees said their malls had also noticed a fall in foot traffic, adding that the current uncertainty made it difficult to predict when business operations will return to normal. “Our focus remains on enabling the retail environments to facilitate a speedy recovery as economic activity resumes.”