Darren Goddard told the high court in Pietermaritzburg on Wednesday that he had intended to challenge an allegation of rape at the school he taught at, but never had the chance. He told Judge Kate Pillay under cross examination that on June 20, 2016, he was verbally suspended from the school by the headmaster. “My recollection is that a teacher approached him [the headmaster], informing him of a specific allegation made against me that entailed rape,” said Goddard. He faces a string of charges for sexually abusing boys, some of whom he is alleged to have raped. There are nine boys in total and the majority claim that Goddard interfered with them during counselling sessions. At the time, Goddard was employed as a counsellor at the school they attended. State advocate Attie Truter asked Goddard not to use the words “I believe” when answering questions at the onset of cross-examination. Truter requested he should answer yes or no. Goddard said he had intended to challenge the rape allegation at the school but that he was arrested three-and-a-half days later. “I believed my suspension was unfair because it was not based on any facts.” When asked by Truter if he had any discussions with the headmaster on June 24, 2016 about any of the boys he is alleged to have sexually abused, Goddard replied he could not recall such conversations. Truter then asked if Goddard approached the headmaster for advice on what he should do, and he said no. “I didn’t see asking him for advice as appropriate because he suspended me.” Later, on further probing, Goddard said that after his verbal suspension, the headmaster phoned and informed him that he heard a case had been opened and suggested he resign. Truter asked why Goddard had difficulties answering the question the first time. He replied that there is so much information he has trouble keeping track of his answers. Goddard described his relationship with the headmaster as being “professional”. Said Truter: “So Mr … [the headmaster] was keeping you informed of developments in the case.” Goddard said yes. He also said that he did not discuss the case with the headmaster after his arrest. However, he said his “understanding” is that family and friends did have contact with the headmaster. Goddard was also asked whether he considered leaving the school, and he said towards the end of 2015 or 2016 he was in two minds whether to remain. Following his suspension, he said he did not have any support from the school. He was unhappy at the school for “multiple reasons”, not all of them relevant to the case, added Goddard. Probed further, he said: “If I was cleared and the suspension lifted, I would have likely returned for a period, not an extended, indefinite period.” Cross examination continues.