While most of the schools in uMgungundlovu District have received their personal protective equipment (PPE) ahead of school reopening, workers who will be helping with screenings and cleaning of classrooms have not received training. Schools in the province are expected to welcome grades 7 and 12 back to the classroom on Monday, while teachers will report for duty tomorrow for the first time since March after the Covid-19 shutdown. KwaZulu-Natal Department of Education officials have been working around the clock providing schools with PPE to ensure that all safety measures are put in place before the reopening. On Tuesday The Witness spoke to a number of disadvantaged and rural schools in the district about their state of readiness. A teacher at Mconjwana High School in Howick said the school had received their PPE, except for masks for the school’s 200 matric pupils. The teacher said the only issue that the school and other schools in the district had was that people who are going to be ensuring the schools remain Covid-19 free still had no idea how to do their job. “Our PPE has arrived and most of the stuff that we need is here. Something that we are still waiting for at the moment are masks for learners and the issue of people that will be responsible for sanitising classes,” said the teacher. “Yes, the department has hired those people, but the problem is that they have not been trained on how to do their job and as teachers we are also clueless when it comes to that. The department has not been clear about that. “As we speak our school has not been fumigated but all the needed equipment is here.” A teacher at Orient Heights Primary School said all was in order in the school and credited the government for a job well done. Yesterday, the National Teachers’ Union (Natu) in a statement said it appeared that the government held the view that once certain materials had been dumped at each school, then the health requirements and conditions for a safe environment for teachers and learners had been met. “While this may be so for some historically privileged schools which have the necessary capacities both within and outside these school communities, for many historically disadvantaged schools this will just be the beginning of the struggle to meet the required health standards,” said Natu’s Allan Thompson. “So far, our information indicates that when some of the cleaning material was delivered at some schools recently, no one knew what it was to be used for, and how. Therefore, our view is that the government needs to first acknowledge that there are some schools which are so far behind that they will not be able to meet the stipulated health conditions. “It is only after this realisation has kicked in that government will see the need to adopt a different approach with respect to such schools.” Addressing the issue of staff training, KZN Department of Education spokesperson Muzi Mahlambi said there was no need to panic as all of that will be sorted out come Monday and they have enlisted the services of the departments of Health and Social Development. “We are quite happy with the progress that we have made from Sunday until now and very confident that come [time] it will be all systems go,” said Mahlambi. “For now, we are talking about the return of teachers on Thursday. “By the time learners come back to school that training shall have been done. We are going to be assisted by educators and at the moment they are not at school and they can’t be receiving that training. “Sanitising of the classrooms will be [done by] cleaners obviously but Health has given us 10 000 of their caregivers and we have others from the Department of Social Development.” He said the department was “comfortable with that number” and that teachers would be adequately assisted when it came to sanitising and screening of learners.