Beauty therapists across the country are rallying together
to get the government to allow them to operate during the national lockdown
aimed at curbing the spread of Covid-19. Hairdressers have been signing online petitions and have
even taken their fight with the government to the high court, demanding the
urgent reopening of their salons. Their reason behind the court application was that they were
struggling with lack of income and some are forced to rely on donations to
survive. Craik Speirs, of the Craik Speirs Hair and Beauty salons,
told Weekend Witness that the six weeks of lockdown have been “traumatic” for
small business owners like himself. Speirs, who has 20 employees, said only a percentage of his
staff have received their Unemployment Insurance Fund (UIF), while some
haven’t. He said some of the UIF payments were delayed, leaving his employees
penniless. “We’re just finding it difficult to understand what actually
is and isn’t allowed under these lockdown regulations. We can’t do anything so
we’re all sitting and waiting for our shops to open, but there are a lot of
other industries who pose a bigger threat to the society than us who are
operating,” he said. Speirs said that as part of their college hairdressing and
beauty training, hygiene and cleanliness were the most important. “Even before Covid-19, we always ran a very clean and
hygienic environment. “If we were to go back to work now, we will take everything
seriously. Having more social distancing, less people in the stores and making
sure all the hygiene protocols are adhered to, but it’s no good because we’ve
been classified as a level 1 and the way people are talking, level 1 is months
away,” said Speirs. He said his greatest fear is that the country will see a
huge economic recession soon, especially for small businesses as they
contributed the most to the economy of the country. “Hairdressing and beauty are one of the biggest industries
in the country. If the government persists that we should open in level 1,
we’ll end up with half of them being able to open their shops again or even
less. “I think right now there’s just so much uncertainty and
everybody is just in a bad space and being closed is not doing us much good at
all,” he said.  Hair salons in town remain closed. Khethelo Makhaye, who owns the Bendalo Hair and Beauty in
Pelham, said: “We are begging that the government allows us to operate again.
We will comply with whatever rules and regulations they put in place.” She said on Wednesday night she eagerly watched President
Cyril Ramaphosa’s speech, hoping he’d announce that salons can operate again,
but much to her disappointment there was no mention of her profession. Makhaye said she has been struggling both emotionally and
financially for the past six weeks since the national lockdown was initiated.
She has two employees who she had to pay from her personal savings account
after delays with their UIF application. Makhaye applied for relief funds last month, and paid an
accountant to sort out their papers but hasn’t been getting any feedback from
the Labour Department, meaning that her employees will go without their
salaries this month. “I told my employees that I cannot pay them this month. I
don’t know how they’re going to cope. “I am even considering asking for donations from my clients,
I don’t want them to give me money, maybe just food parcels and vouchers and
then I can give those to my employees.” Fortunately, Makhaye said she was given a three-months’
grace period for her rent. “As grateful as I am, this is an accumulating debt and after
this lockdown I’ll be owing a lot of money. “We have no income but we still have other bills to pay.” Makhaye said it seemed like small business owners were being
marginalised by the government, as she is not allowed to open her business, yet
she also does not qualify to apply for the R350 unemployment grant. She also mentioned the strict hygiene and cleanliness taught
at beauty college, adding that they’d have to spend more money to improve hygiene
when they open. Weekend Witness also learnt that despite the strict
regulations preventing beauticians to operate, there were salons in
Pietermaritzburg operating behind closed doors. Whilst walking in town on Thursday afternoon, the Weekend
Witness noticed that all the salons were locked and the lights were out, except
for one. When the reporter looked through the closed glass door, two
women were inside. One sat on her chair while the other stood behind her
braiding her hair. The first question the hairstylist asked the reporter was:
“Are you a police officer?”; and then: “Do you want me to also braid your
hair”. The hairstylist, who asked not to be named, told Weekend
Witness that she was more afraid of being arrested for working during lockdown
than getting the virus. “I need to eat and the only thing I know how to do is braid
people’s hair. I wash my hands before and after braiding people’s hair and pray
that I don’t get the virus,” she said.