Despite “teething problems”, local restaurants have adapted to the delivery-only model and have been serving a flood of customers. Con Malherbe of Coffeeberry at Cascades Centre said while they were operating under strained circumstances, there were positive signs. “We’re going good. These couple of days we’ve got our new system collaboratively built. There was a shortage of delivery guys, but we’ve had a lot of business via Mr Delivery, which has been accommodating.” Malherbe said they had launched a coffee delivery service. “We’ve been delivering coffee like nobody’s business. I’m pleased we took the decision to open our stores. We’re probably running at about 10 to 15% of our actual turnover. “There is no ways that we are anywhere near meeting the overheads that go into running a 140-seater restaurant but we are in the game. The wheels are turning and we’re learning a lot from this. We’re hoping that the next step will be to get the collections going.” Greg Cornell of Taste of Thai in Hilton said they has also had overwhelming response. This week, he said they had received about 80 delivery orders. “On the first day, we experienced some teething problems. We tried to get food out in batches and customers had to wait a while. Now we have more drivers and it’s going very well. The people have supported us beautifully and it’s helping us.” An emotional Sherree Hamblin of Hamblins Catering said she was overwhelmed by the support Maritzburgers have given to small businesses. “We’ve had incredible support. We are so grateful for the work because we are trying to keep our business alive. “People are treating us as though we are their heroes because they can’t work from home, clean house, look after their children and cook. “We are thrilled to be open and to be of service to people. I want to thank the community for their support. The heart of Maritzburg really needs to be thanked.” Chantel Gilbert, owner of Crossways in Hilton, said: “I need more drivers. Last night [Wednesday] we had about 55 orders from 4 pm to 7 pm. We are not going to have our normal overheads but it is definitely sustainable.” A number of restaurants resumed operations last Friday as the country moved from hard lockdown to Level 4 despite fears of incurring further losses. KFC, which re-opened between five and 10% of its restaurants on Saturday, said the stores that are open are currently operating at between 16% and 20% capacity. “Despite a smaller complement of team members, and a bigger reliance on our aggregators [delivery services], we delivered a substantial amount of meals on Saturday with an even larger increase in those sales figures on Sunday. We expect to see a significant increase over the week and look forward to the impact of this uptake, in helping to restart the economy,” a spokesperson said. Uber Eats, which delivers KFC food, says chicken wings were the top-selling item ordered on the first weekend, followed by pizza and hotdogs. KFC, Nando’s and Burger King continue to lobby government to allow drive-through services. The KFC spokesperson says the company continues to work with its landlords to open even more restaurants in the coming weeks. KFC owner Yum! Brands has not paid rent for its premises while its 48 non-franchised outlets are closed. The more than other 1 100 KFC outlets, which are owned by franchisees, made their own arrangements. While Nando’s opened 21 of its restaurants countrywide this week, it said it was not yet able to confirm when it would reopen all its restaurants. It said it is seeking more clarification.