BRRROOOOOOMS! He yelled this out with his characteristic rising inflection
at the end of the word, making ingenious bird-like whistles in between as he
walked up the street. Did you hear him around our suburbs pre-lockdown? (I keep
imagining that this will be how we will mark time henceforth — BC19 (Before
Covid-19) and PC19 (Post Covid-19)). All the dogs in the neighbourhood went crazy at these new
sounds that probably hurt their ears a bit. It’s a cacophony of his shouts and whistles and the frenzied
yapping that approached slowly and waned in just as protracted measures. We’ve heard him in our city for probably some 25 years now. In our first house in Lincoln Meade, he came around one day
and we had no idea what the hell was happening. As the noise approached we
ventured out to look down the sloping road and there, like some peddler from
by-gone days, he approached. First we saw the ostrich feathers from the dusters
he carried high over his shoulder sticking up over the horizon of the gentle
hill he climbed. Then the brooms came into sight. Just as we thought we were hallucinating, his head and body
appeared and we understood it all. We were fascinated by his whistles. He has the most amazing
range of trills and swoopy calls. I’m surprised he hasn’t deafened himself in
the process, though. It was hard work carrying all those home-made grass brooms,
dusters and ironing-board covers. He sweated and toiled and we always gave him a bottle of
water and some biscuits for energy if we caught him. His brooms aren’t cheap.
If you see him again one day, don’t expect to pay less than they’re worth. Nor should
you. But they’re sturdy and last well enough. He’s also a master salesman.
Guaranteed if you only need a broom you’ll end up with a long feather duster
and an ironing-board cover too. You know what? You’ll always use them, and I’d
rather he got my bucks than some big supermarket chain. They get enough from me
anyway. He’d have come a long way. So he also had to cover his
transport costs. Did you know he travelled here all the way from Durban? He told me he lives there and comes up here to sell his goods
on weekends, lugging his load around the town. No wonder the poor guy was so
thirsty. He’d often appear in my road at around 2 pm, and by the size of the
load he still bore, I’d know how much he’d sold. While lockdown is in place, I’ve been doing a lot of outside
garden work that I don’t usually do, and I confess I hadn’t realised what a
dire state our grass garden broom was in. Thinking about it, it’s probably well
over a year since the broom man came around, and his broom is used extensively
twice a week. My poor gardener never said anything, but how he sweeps with
it, I have no idea. It made me cringe. I should have thought to check it. It’s
still beautifully intact but the stiff grass bristles have worn down a good 10
centimetres or so. As a result there’s a lot less flex in them. After 20 minutes of sweeping I find myself exhausted and
blistered — my soft hands not used to that kind of friction. So I’ve vowed to
get him a new broom and that’s what made me wonder how our broom guy is. How’s
he making his living now? I guess we’re all by now very conscious of the plight of
those we know well, or are acquainted with, who can’t work at all. I think of the shampooists and staff at the salon I go to,
the beauty therapist who gives me movie star eyebrows (dunno quite which movie
star they resemble now — Groucho Marx perhaps), the waitrons at the restaurants
we wined and dined at and the car guards who kept watch while we ate. I think
of their individual faces and how much I miss seeing them, even just in these
contexts of self-indulgence which seem far away, and almost anachronistic,
right now. We’ve seen the photos and footage of the very real need out
there (make sure they’re not fake first!) and it can all seem very
overwhelming. We get the social-media pleas to help this or that feeding
scheme and wish we could win the Lotto and end all their woes. I reckon be careful who you give money to though. Make sure
anything you donate will indeed go to those who need it most. And if you’re certain you’ll be okay, and you’ve made sure
your own domestic and commercial staff will be, give, give and give as much as
you can. How little it is, doesn’t matter. I’m grateful I’ve been able to continue working through
lockdown. I’m very aware I’m one of the very lucky few. But enough of this. Go and grab your weekend by the arms,
hug it close and then dance it away. You deserve it. Just stay home, and if you venture out for
any (legitimate) reason, don’t forget your mask. Me, I’m going to be sweeping my yard again. Anyone got a
good home remedy for blisters? 