The Aloe Ridge invaders have used the Covid-19 lockdown to resist plans by ANC provincial leaders to kick them out. Mkhonto weSizwe (MK) veterans have been illegally occupying about 300 flats at the Aloe Ridge social housing project apartments in Westgate for two years. Shortly before the start of the lockdown in March they had agreed during a meeting with provincial Human Settlement MEC Peggy Nkonyeni and ANC provincial deputy chairperson Mike Mabuyakhulu to vacate the flats that they had hijacked. The ANC leadership gave the former soldiers an ultimatum to either vacate the flats within two weeks or face eviction and disciplinary action. However, Mkhonto weSizwe Military Association (MKMVA) Moses Mabhida regional chairperson Mzo Kheswa on Thursday said there had never been an agreement. “The meeting was with the regional MKMVA leadership and not with the soldiers in Aloe Ridge. As the regional leadership our position is that whoever wants to put proposals on the table around the Aloe Ridge matter should directly engage those people who are occupying the flats. “The issue of housing is a very sensitive matter and can only be dealt with in consultation with people who are directly affected,” he said. The company that owns the Aloe Ridge rental housing complex with about 950 flats has already incurred millions of rands in losses as the war vets were not paying rent. The company, Capital City Housing (CCH), was under business rescue after defaulting on bond repayments. With a loss of nearly R1 million a month as a result of the invasion, the company is now at great risk of having its properties repossessed by the banks. While Mabuyakhulu had declined to disclose details about the meetings he held with the MKMVA regional leadership, sources told The Witness that the ANC provincial leadership resolved to put the matter on ice after realising that it would be difficult to get the war vets evicted under the lockdown. “The ... regulations make it explicitly clear that evicting people from houses for whatever reasons is illegal. “So, if the ANC had persisted with any processes around the Aloe Ridge matter the exercise would have been a futile one as nothing would have been done in the event of the people currently occupying the flats refusing to leave,” the source said. While the Msunduzi Municipality was not directly involved in efforts to kick out the war vets, the council has a vested interest as CCH has not been able to pay rates due to cash flow problems caused by the invasion. In a recent interview with The Witness, Msunduzi Mayor Mzi Thebolla said the municipality was concerned it might not be able to recoup monies owed to it by CCH should the company go into liquidation. The R353 million housing project, launched in 2014, was officially opened by former president Jacob Zuma in 2017. Sixty percent of the funding for the private/public project came from a government housing grant while the balance was raised through loans. At the time of the invasion the MK vets claimed that they occupied the flats because government had reneged on its promise to build houses for them. While the municipality have already provided sites where houses for the war vets can be built, sources say the former soldiers in Aloe Ridge have since told the MKMVA regional leadership that they would only move out once the new houses had been built.