Two months ago, Ziyanda Mnyandu was in high spirits. After going through an extensive application process, his dream of being accepted into Hilton College was finally realised. The 12-year-old from Mpumuza had managed to secure an international sponsor and for a while things seemed to be going according to plan. He was going to be the first child in his poverty-stricken community to attend the prestigious school. But then the Covid-19 pandemic struck and now his dreams are in tatters. His sponsor has pulled out and Ziyanda’s family will never afford the education they wanted him to get at Hilton College. Ziyanda is currently doing Grade 7 at Tetelegu Primary School, where he is the head boy. The disappointed family said that the potential funder from the U.S. withdrew his support last month due to the repercussions of the Covid-19 outbreak. Ziyanda’s mother Cebisile Mnyandu told The Witness she was told the funder withdrew because the U.S. doesn’t allow offshore transactions anymore as a result of the pandemic. Mnyandu said the school had only accepted Ziyanda based on the full assurance there was a sponsor. And while the family managed to find another local sponsor to pay the pupil’s acceptance fee, they are struggling to find someone to pay for the rest of his tuition fee. Mnyandu is unemployed. “His place is secured but for him to complete the enrolment process, he has to pay the remainder of the school fees,” she said. Mnyandu said they approached Hilton for bursary assistance, but the school said that it had already exhausted funds for underprivileged pupils. “The day he got accepted, he was very excited. He told me that he would work hard to be like the other pupils coming from privileged schools,” she said. She said the turn of events had left her son feeling disheartened. “It’s sad that due to financial constraints his dream has been halted. “I had hoped that this opportunity would be a step in the right direction for him. We all want what’s best for our children, but my hands are tied.” Ranford Ancwi, Ziyanda’s mentor and a chapel assistant at Hilton College, said he met the pupil through one of his relatives who is also studying through a scholarship at the school. “He has the potential to adapt to the culture of Hilton College. We took him to two initiatives the school had organised for prospective students and he was able to interact with his peers very well. “Academically, he’s a fast learner and has produced outstanding results at his current school. All he needs is the privilege to study,” said Ancwi.