Award-winning documentary filmmaker Nicole Schafer was stunned to be recognised for her directing skills at this year’s South African Film and Television Awards (Saftas), which were revealed online on Wednesday evening. Her feature-length documentary, Buddha in Africa, has picked up numerous awards around the world, and was named best documentary at the country’s answer to the Oscars and Emmy Awards. But the KZN Midlands resident never expected to get the directing gong. “To be honest I don’t have much confidence in my directing ability, primarily because I usually shoot my own films and seldom have any other crew other than an interpreter and/or sound assistant,” she explained. “This is my first feature documentary, and coming from more of a journalistic background I had re-learn or rather unlearn my style of directing for television to capture a more observational and intimate portrayal of my protagonist, Enock Alu.” Buddha in Africa, which was named best documentary feature film, shares the experiences affecting African youth in Malawi, at a time where there has been increased Chinese involvement on the African continent, sparking global debate around the implications of this growing relationship. Another multi-award-winning documentary, STROOP:Journey Into The Rhino Horn War, made by director Susan Scott and television presenter Bonné de Bod, was named best natural history and environmental programme. The film investigates the global trade in rhino horn and seeks to understand why so many of South Africa’s rhinos are brutally poached and why people view the horns as a cure for cancer and other diseases. Said De Bod: “Not only does the win shine a spotlight on the rhino crisis, but it is extremely relevant due to the current coronavirus global pandemic, as the film highlights Asia’s captive wild animal practices. “The coronavirus has been a wake-up call around the world for us all to clearly see the dangers of human involvement in illegal wildlife trade.” In the feature film category, the biggest winner was Knuckle City, the Eastern Cape-set boxing movie directed by Jahmil X.T. Qubeka. It received awards for editing, production design, make-up and hairstyling, and a directing gong for Qubeka. Actors Bongile Mantsai and Patrick Ndlovu were named best actor and best supporting actor, respectively. It wasn’t, however, named best film. That honour went to Fiela se Kind, which also won the prize for best screenwriting. The best actress and best supporting actress awards went to Clementine Mosimane and Anna-Mart van der Merwe for their work in the big screen adaptation of the novel, Poppie Nongena. In the telenovela/soap categories, M-Net’s The River won 10 awards, including best actress for Sindi Dlathu, best supporting actress for Mary-Anne Barlow, and best telenovela.