Police have arrested 22 000 people around the province for violating the Covid-19 lockdown, and 3 600 police and soldiers have been deployed to Pietermaritzburg where adherence to regulations has been poor. However, general crime has dropped by 49%. Briefing members of the KZN legislature portfolio committee on community safety on Tuesday, provincial police commissioner, General Khombinkosi Jula, said lack of compliance with lockdown regulations in the city had resulted in police escalating their operations in Pietermaritzburg. “We remain concerned about non-compliance and as such we will be stepping up visibility in Pietermaritzburg,” he said. More than 3 600 law enforcement officers, who include members of the South African Police Services, the South African National Defence Force (SANDF) and traffic department have been deployed to Pietermaritzburg. Police operations since the start of the lockdown have so far resulted in the confiscation of more than 551 000 millilitres of alcohol and 5 400 loose cigarettes in the city. Major transgressions within the city include failure to adhere to social distancing rules, particularly at month-end. Besides making arrests, police are also engaging business owners to address the problem of long queues outside supermarkets and other businesses. While Pietermaritzburg and Isipingo in Durban are non-compliance hot spots, Jula said other areas of the province have also become a problem, resulting in police arresting more than 22 000 people in the province since the start of the lockdown. While committee members were impressed with the manner in which police in the province were responding to incidents of non-compliance, there were concerns about reports of police using excessive force when dealing with issues of non-compliance. Last week a video of KwaDukuza traffic officers manhandling 10 people, including a medical doctor, who allegedly broke the rules by hanging out at the Chaka’s Rock beach in Ballito, went viral on social media. Jula said the doctor, who initially claimed that the traffic officers had manhandled him, had not pressed any criminal charges against the officers. “When members of the SAPS advised him to open a case against the traffic officers he declined,” he said. Jula said the doctor, and the nine other people who were with him, has since been charged for violating lockdown regulations. “They will appear in court on August 10,” he said. In its report presented to the committee, the Independent Police Investigative Directorate (IPID) confirmed that complaints against police since the start of the lockdown had been on the rise. While some members of the public had complained that police had abused them, particularly at roadblocks, the IPID said most of the evidence, including pictures submitted by complainants, had not been helpful. In most cases the pictures and videos could not help IPID investigators as the alleged perpetrators were wearing masks. Jula assured committee members that the provincial police top brass would not hesitate to take action against members who had been accused of wrongdoing.