KwaZulu-Natal teachers will go back to school on Thursday and principals are expected to report for duty on Monday, despite the South African Democratic Teachers’ Union (Sadtu) saying schools are not ready. Premier Sihle Zikalala said during his weekly media briefing on KwaZulu-Natal’s Covid-19 status on Sunday the timing was taken to ensure that all schools have been thoroughly cleaned and that all the necessary personal protective equipment (PPE) is delivered. A total of 90 057 teachers and staff are expected to return to work on Thursday. Grade 7 and matric pupils are expected to return to the classroom on June 1. Sadtu said in a statement on Sunday the KwaZulu-Natal is not ready to open. The union said very little personal protective equipment (PPE) had been delivered to schools. The premier however on Sunday stressed “sufficient quantities” have been delivered to districts and circuit offices and some of the schools, adding that all pupils and teachers will be provided with the equipment. Zikalala said KZN is on track to resume the 2020 academic calendar in accordance with strict health and safety guidelines. The province announced that the Grade 12 May/June examinations will be moved to final examinations in October. He said the department had recruited 10 000 community care givers to implement health protocols. He said most of KZN’s schools have been decontaminated since cleaning started on May 15. He added classrooms will be cleaned in the morning and afternoon. He said a comprehensive assessment for grass cutting and cleaning of schools was completed on May 17. “Districts were given the green light to appoint the local people to cut the grass and remove other encroaching bushes in schools,” he said. The premier added there is a plan to ensure safe school access control and only pupils wearing masks will be allowed. He said 4 500 water tanks have been obtained, with 250 delivered to priority schools to date. “Water will be available in all schools. Water availability will be checked every day before the next day starts,” the premier said. He repeated that the school nutrition programme would be reopened for all pupils when grades 12 and 7 are reintroduced to schools. Responding to a question on permits for teachers and pupils from outside the province, KZN Education MEC Kwazi Mshengu said permits have been dispatched to circuit offices. On teachers with co-morbidities, whom unions had asked to be exempted and for substitutes to be hired, Mshengu said: “There are health protocols that have been developed to guide departments and all the schools. It’s multiple illnesses combined with age which we can consider, and we request greater co-operation in this regard.” LABORATORY TESTS Zikalala said KwaZulu-Natal now reports an average of 20 new Covid-19 cases a day, which is less than half the 45 daily average in the past weeks. “Based on the current patient load we have adequate stock in all our facilities,” Zikalala said. He said the slow return of laboratory testing was being dealt with by both the provincial and the national departments of Health. “We are hoping that soon the results will be produced fast enough for the teams to make decisions on all the tested people,” Zikalala said.