The bungling in the handling of the first confirmed case of Covid-19 in Mpofana has resulted in the Mooi River police station being shut down, police being placed in self-isolation and a legal tit-for-tat between an EFF councillor and mayor Xolani Duma. National police spokesperson Brigadier Vishnu Naidoo confirmed that the police station was shut down on Saturday after a man who had tested positive for the coronavirus interacted with police officers when he visited the station with his family and an EFF leader to lay charges against the mayor for mishandling his case. He said the two constables who came into contact with the man are in self-isolation for 14 days and will be tested for the virus. The police station was due to reopen on Tuesday after decontamination. Local EFF leader Xabiso Zikhali accompanied the man to the police station so he could open a criminal case against Duma after the mayor had confirmed in a video circulated on social media that a resident from the Phumlas section of Bruntville township had tested positive for the virus. “An ambulance under police escort was then dispatched to the victim’s house and took him to the local clinic in full view of the entire community. “The mayor and other councillors did not only expose the victim’s identity, they also put his life in danger as he could easily be attacked by those who feel that he will infect the community,’’ Zikhali said. In retaliation, the mayor asked the police to lay attempted murder charges against Zikhali for endangering the lives of locals and the police by walking the man to the police station despite the fact that he had tested positive. “The law must take its course. Police have assured us that they will charge him [Zikhali] with attempted murder as soon as the police station reopens. “We can’t allow a situation where our efforts to fight Covid-19 are hampered by certain individuals who accuse us of telling lies when we tell the public that Covid-19 is real,” he said. However, Zikhali, who is now also in self-isolation, said it was the authorities who made him doubt that the man was Covid-19 positive. “After they had taken him to the clinic they then released him to come back home. As far as I understand, they should have taken him straight to hospital. “When rumours began circulating that he had Covid-19, I thought it was just a rumour and when he came back home after visiting the clinic I believed that he was negative. “How can you bring back home a person who is positive and endanger the lives of his family members. The mayor should not have allowed that to happen in the first place,” Zikhali said. According to the KZN Covid-19 Command Council, which only releases Covid-19 statistics by district, disclosing the specific areas were people infected with the virus come from could contribute to the identity of sick people being revealed, thus exposing them to stigmatisation.