Pietermaritzburg police have arrested 1 600 people across the city since the start of the Covid-19 lockdown, and Police Minister Bheki Cele has hinted that he will recommend that Msunduzi should revert to Level 5. Cele visited the city on Monday as part of his nationwide hands-on approach to ensure every province was adequately equipped and adhering to the rules of social distancing. In Edendale, Cele — flanked by heavily armed SAPS members and the KZN MEC for Community Safety and Liaison Bheki Ntuli — visited KwaDambuza, the Greater Edendale Mall and the Kwamabulala shopping centre. Although disappointed that social distancing was not being adhered to, Cele said he understood the people’s plight. He said he was happy that shopping malls were adhering to social distancing and ensuring that patrons wore masks at all times. But, he said: “In KwaDambuza its as if people have never heard of this virus. They have never heard of masks or social distancing. “It looks like there is confusion between level 5 and level 4. Most people thought that we’re opening up. For instance, under level 5, 10 people were arrested in Pietermaritzburg for the alcohol related offences, but since level 4 it’s almost 60 offences of dispensing, selling and transporting alcohol. Almost everybody here is asking for us to open the liquor shops, but the crime statistics tell a very good story. I think it’s because of the visibility and the non-availability of alcohol,” Cele said. Having witnessed low compliance with mask wearing and social distancing in the Edendale area, Cele, who is a member of the regulations committee, hinted that he is likely to recommend to the council that Pietermaritzburg go back to level 5. He added that, police visibility, coupled with the ban of alcohol, had reduced violent crimes. “Alcohol is not just a question of entertainment. There is lot of death. There is lot of crimes like murders and rapes. “We believe that going forward, we’ll have to find the ways of dealing with new laws, for instance, we should have a national alcohol act rather than the provincial that gives problems to the police who need to enforce the law.” At the Greater Edendale Mall, the minister walked through the centre urging people to comply with the regulation. He was greeted with loud cheers and ululation as he engaged with residents, who asked him when he would permit the sale of alcohol. Responding to the many questions on the lifting of the alcohol ban, Cele said he had no definite answer. “The regulations committee is currently discussing level 3 restrictions. We hope we’ll get advice from the experts to tell when we’re going to open it. I don’t have a definite answer, but the time will come when these outlets will be open.” He said the Western Cape and Eastern Cape remained a cause for concern, while KZN had shown a slight improvement in adhering to the Covid-19 regulations. “Western Cape and Eastern Cape are giving us sleepless nights even when it comes to the SAPS.” Cele said of the 253 police officers who have tested positive for Covid-19, 184 were from the Western Cape. No police officers have tested positive in uMgungundlovu. “At the present moment we are just enjoying the low levels of crime because of the non-availability of alcohol,” he said. A shopper, Nobuhle Dlamini, said she was happy to see the minister monitoring the situation during the lockdown, and was satisfied with the compliance of the supermarkets. Another shopper, Mnikelwa Zungu, said he was forced, by hunger, to come to the shops. “I have been in the queue for more than an hour and there are plenty of us, so I cannot say I am safe but there is nothing I can do. I have accepted the situation because the kids want food at home, otherwise I wouldn’t be here,” said Zungu.