Teachers in KwaZulu-Natal will not return to work today as expected after a total of five unions, Sadtu, Natu, Peu, Naptosa and SAOU, came together on Wednesday and instructed them not to set their foot in schools until further notice. The Department of Education in the province had said teachers would report for duty today while Grade 7 and 12 pupils return on Monday. In a joint statement on Wednesday, the unions said government has not prepared schools in line with Covid-19 regulations to be ready to welcome both teachers and pupils. “We advise our members in the province not to report to schools on May 28 because schools are not ready to receive them under the Covid-19 related protocols,” reads the statement. The unions also said that their representatives in the various districts confirmed unanimously that not all schools have received the agreed upon personal protective equipment (PPE). According to the unions, some schools have not had existing water tanks filled and neither have all schools been cleaned nor had the grass cut. “We must be consistent, education in this province will commence when all schools are ready to receive learners and teachers safely. “We call on the employer to work closely with us as unions so that we devise a comprehensive plan together, an exercise that will require two to three weeks of uninterrupted work.” The unions also said the Department of Basic Education has published standard operating procedures for teachers, non-teaching staff and pupils on coronavirus, which the KZN Department of Education under MEC Kwazi Mshengu “chose to completely ignore”. They said unlike other provinces, KZN did not start to gather information on teachers who are more at risk of being infected. “The unions believe that the department’s lack of direction in this regard is indicative of their failure to support and calm the already anxious employee. The Coronavirus Orientation Guidelines for Schools published by the DBE provides guidance and unions are advising members accordingly.” In spite of the unions clearly stating that none of their members will report for work today, KZN Education spokesperson Muzi Mahlambi said: “We note the joint statement by unions. We are aware of some of the gaps in some areas but generally we are happy with the progress that we have made and it gives us confidence that many of our schools will be ready to operate as from tomorrow, May 28.”