School governing bodies are up in arms that they have to procure service providers themselves to sanitise schools. This follows a circular sent to schools last week on what needs to be done in preparation for the reopening of schools in KwaZulu-Natal. Dr Erna de Lange, CEO of the Governing Body Foundation in KZN, said the contents of the document were never discussed or negotiated with the governing bodies. “It is unreasonable and unacceptable. We ask that this be withdrawn. This is an instruction to SGBs. SGBs are stakeholders, not employees.” The foundation represents 150 schools in quintile 4 and 5, which are fee-paying schools. The circular states that the principals and SGBs must source co-operatives for three months to disinfect, sanitise and deep cleanse schools. If they can’t, then they must recruit capable individuals to perform the tasks. The department has also stipulated daily rates for sanitising. For small schools with nine classrooms, R150; medium schools with 15 classrooms, R200; large schools with 25 classrooms, R250; and mega schools of over 25 classrooms and hostels, R300. Funds will be transferred to schools after proof of the awards and invoices are sent to the department. In addition, the circular also contains a detailed guideline on the process of disinfecting schools. De Lange said school fee payment has dropped considerably and there are retrenchments looming. “Employing people to sanitise is adding to the salary bill. There is a procurement process to follow that would take time.” She said that while they would like schools to re-open and children to be back at school, the “problem is that the department has not consulted with the parent associations and suddenly passes the buck”. De Lange added that it is the department’s responsibility to procure, employ and pay the service providers, not the SGBs. Schools don’t have the financial resources for what’s not budgeted and people employed for cleaning need to be trained. “If something goes wrong who is going to be held accountable?” she asked. Various chairpersons of SGBs in Pietermaritzburg and Durban have come together to form a committee. Doug Mundell, chairperson of the Maritzburg College SGB, who is also part of the committee, said the circular is poorly drafted and in many respects “impossible to implement”. He said the way the SGBs have been kept out of the loop and not consulted is very unhelpful. In many cases SGBs provide four times more finances into the state’s education responsibilities than what the state does, through school fees. “Surely the majority contributor should at the very least be consulted. We are in constant contact with many SGB chairpersons and are all on the same page. Going forward we need to be heard and will take the necessary steps to make this a reality.” Other stakeholders, mainly the state and unions, should refrain from “petty power plays and frivolous politicking” and focus on the job at hand — doing what is best for pupils, staff and parents, added Mundell. Paul Rencken, provincial manager of the Federation of Governing Bodies of South African Schools (FEDSAS), said in a letter to the department that the circular violates the constitutional doctrine of legality, is unlawful and irregular. It is also in contravention of several regulations. He said it is the department’s responsibility to provide and maintain a working environment that is safe and without risks to the health of workers. Therefore, the instruction to SGBs is irregular. “Some of the schools have depleted all their reserve funds and cannot pay for PPE and services upfront. There is also no guarantee that once proof of awards and invoices are submitted that the transfer of funds will take place. “We therefore request that payment of allocations be made directly to schools to enable them to carry out their own procurement and to deal directly with suppliers and contractors within their own standard procurement procedures.” Education spokesperson Sihle Mlotshwa said the concerns being raised have been noted. “We are engaging with them to find common ground.” CLEANING and disinfecting guidelines for KZN schools as stated in the circular: • Clean and disinfect bathrooms, classrooms, kitchens, staff offices and toilet surfaces at least once daily. Cleaning materials as well as Protective Personal Equipment (PPEs) will be provided. Cleaning staff will be required to wear the full PPEs. • Household soap or disinfectant should be used first for cleaning and then, after rinsing regular household disinfectant containing 0,5% sodium hypochlorite should be used. • Surfaces and objects must be wiped with disinfectant. • Gloves and protective clothing should be used when cleaning working surfaces. After use, utility gloves should be cleaned with soap and water and decontaminated with 0,5% sodium hypochlorite solution. Single-use gloves such as latex should be discarded after each use. • Cleaners must perform hand hygiene before and after removing gloves.