The shortage of testing kits for Covid-19 in the province
has resulted in a backlog of at least 9 000 submitted samples. And some healthworkers have called for a halt to the testing
saying that government’s mass community testing may be putting pressure on an
already strained system. Weekend Witness understands that the National Health
Laboratory Service (NHLS) in the province is struggling to keep up with demands
of testing submitted specimens due to shortages of kits. Sources say this has halted testing services in some
hospitals in Durban resulting in patients having to wait over seven days for
results and leaving many fearing that infected patients who should otherwise be
self-quarantining, could be exposing others to the virus. Addington Hospital in Durban is currently not testing as it
has run out of  kits, while Inkosi Albert
Luthuli is also not testing to  full
capacity. RK Khan in Chatsworth has not started testing also due to the
shortages. The KZN Health Department previously said that testing was
being done at rates of 30 to 100 a day before the mass community testing was
rolled out last month. The department said 1 130 workers  throughout the province had been screening
about 40 000 people a day, exceeding the target of 13 000. The NHLS said on Friday that 403 018 tests had been
conducted countrywide with 16 666 done in the last 24-hour cycle. “Municipalities must halt community testing until the
backlog is resolved. Contacts should be tested when they have  indications of Covid-19 symptoms only,” one
healthcare worker said. The  worker suggested
that to lessen the backlog, people without symptoms of Covid-19 should not be
tested. “A negative test on a day does not mean the person is not
infected and incubating the transmissible virus. “Current laboratory tests only indicate a positive result
when the viral load reaches a certain level. This is also usually the level at
which symptoms start to present. Testing contacts without symptoms of the
diseases drains resources,” said the worker. Widespread testing “does not make sense for South Africa”,
said anaesthesiology Nathi Mdladla. The community testing is gross wasteful expenditure “with no
real return on that investment as it will not aid the country in making any
meaningful interventions nor will it aid us in limiting disease spread”, he
said. “If 80% of the population has mild disease that does not
require admission, what is the value of knowing that people are positive when
they can’t be treated and in the face of high false negatives. It would be
cheaper to assume that everyone is positive and continue practices aimed at
limiting spread in the general population. “At the moment mainly, symptomatic people are being tested.
So, the numbers we are deriving from these results mean there is probably a
higher infection rate with even less mortality than we are projecting,” Dr
Mdladla said. He said the mounting concern now is the collateral damage
that is caused by delays experienced from waiting for Covid-19 test results in
conditions like sepsis, bacterial pneumonia, stroke, heart attacks and other
medical emergencies, that still occur even during the pandemic. “This will be gross wasteful expenditure with no real return
on that investment as it will not aid the country in making any meaningful
interventions nor will it aid us in limiting disease spread. It produces false
security while causing maximum panic. There are way cheaper and sensible ways
of dealing with this pandemic than knee jerk reactions borne out of fear,” said
Mdladla. Weighing in on the issue, another local doctor said: “The
widespread community testing makes no sense especially because the polymerase
chain reaction test has a sensitivity of between 51-63%. The turnaround time at
the hospital is four to six days. We don’t have space to isolate so many
patients waiting for a test result.” “We have patients in our isolation ward waiting five days
with no result yet,” the doctor said. 