A number of popular local restaurants are opening their doors for deliveries on Friday, despite their fears they won’t break even while the lockdown is in place. Fast-food restaurants, including Chicken Licken, Debonairs and Steers, will reopen today for fast food deliveries. Yesterday, KFC said it will be back in action tomorrow. Peri-peri chicken restaurant Nando’s will not reopen. According to new regulations gazetted on Wednesday, the sale of hot, prepared food will be permitted for delivery only. Customers cannot visit restaurants to get the takeaways. Restaurants may open for food delivery services only, between 9 am to 7 pm. Other fast food restaurants confirmed to open today include Burger King, Wimpy, McDonald’s, Debonairs Pizza, Fishaways and Romans Pizza. Restaurants under the Spur Group will not be operating during this time. Ocean Basket has also reportedly confirmed that it will not be operating. Both groups cite the operating costs of running large kitchens which make it impossible for them to be a take-away only restaurant. Mr D Food delivery will also resume full operation from Friday. The Witness canvassed local restaurants yesterday, some of which were not in an immediate position to give comment. While many restaurants are choosing not to open, especially since they are unable to sell alcohol, this means a loss of income. Stephanie Fzecfei, one of the directors at the Fern Hill Hotel near Howick said, “It wasn’t an easy decision, but we can’t give up. We need to make sure we earn money to make sure we survive this.” Fzecfei said they have kept some cash aside and have negotiated with their creditors into taking cash on delivery. “We are doing this as well to pay our creditors back for March. As this starts making money, that money will go straight back into getting more stock. Slowly, we’ll get a profit and it will go to clearing debt. “We need to average around R5 000 a day. It’s quite substantial but we just have to try.” She said the Fern Hill Hotel will be delivering frozen meals between 3 pm and 5 pm. “We are working with extreme regulations. It’s quite a strict operation.” Fzecfei said yesterday she was already inundated with calls from customers making pre-orders. Carrie Ballantyne of Tea on 23 in Scottsville said she was also readying herself to do deliveries. “Everybody needs their bread and butter. Nobody can afford to just close with no notice. We are doing it because we can cook and do the deliveries. “We are paying overheads anyway so any bit of business will help us.” Chantel Gilbert, owner of Crossways in Hilton, said the restaurant will also be operating with skeleton staff and limited items on the menu. She said profits will be strongly dependent on the number of deliveries and the amount people will be spending. Con Malherbe said they were still “sussing out” the situation with their customers. “We are never going to come anywhere close to covering our fixed operational costs. Normally our deliveries amount to five percent of our turnover. “We are hoping to push them up to 15% of our turnover. This is uncharted territory that we are going into. We are going to start conservative and see how it goes.” He said they have also received an overwhelming public response online. “We are going to go in in good faith that we can negotiate with the landlord to give us a chance. We are desperate to generate income and employ some staff.” Malherbe said they anticipated starting with the deliveries on Saturday once all logistics have been sorted out. Greg Cornell of Taste of Thai in Hilton, which will also be reopening said, “We are going to try and concentrate on Hilton for now and we’ll see how it goes. There are going to be teething problems and we urge customers to be understanding.”