When Carrie Lagerwall sat down to pen an ode to President Cyril Ramaphosa amid the national lockdown, she did not think it would go viral. The mother of three from Greytown told The Witness while she could not comprehend the weight on the first citizen’s shoulders, she wrote the 178-word poem to offer her support. Titled My President, You’re Tired, part of the poem reads: “My president you’re tired. We can see it in your eyes. It’s not really something you can easily hide.” The poem, which she posted on her Facebook page on April 21, has received over a million views and 8 000 shares. “The response took me by surprise,” Lagerwall said. “The highest response I’ve ever had on my post was about 7 500 readers. I never thought it would get to a million.” Lagerwall, a technical content writer, runs a Facebook page dedicated to sharing inspirational and uplifting content. She said she was inspired to write the poem after Ramaphosa announced a massive social relief and economic support package. “My heart was sore when I saw his face and how tired he looked. I can’t imagine doing what he does. I wanted people to extend grace to him. “We have so many little groups of people angry about specific things, but they don’t have the full picture that he is facing.” Lagerwall added: “I have children and I can give them an instruction; whether they are obedient to my instruction or not depends on them. Imagine 60 million people. “I can hardly manage my three.” She had written a poem to the president when the initial lockdown was announced and decided to the second poem which struck a chord with social media users. “He is doing a remarkable job despite what people may think,” she said. While the majority of the responses have been positive, Lagerwall notes that she had received a backlash for publicly supporting the president. “I had messages in my inbox calling me a traitor to the white race. It’s not about colour or creed, it’s about humans supporting a human. “A lot of people forget that he is not a god and he is trying.” Lagerwall said the pandemic had been hard for her family too. “It’s definitely difficult. Being a farmer’s wife, we’ve taken a knock because there is no sale in produce. “At the end of it all, I am a very resilient and positive person.” She said she has been informed that the president has received the poem and will be in contact. “I don’t need him to respond. I just need him to know that there are millions of South Africans praying for him. We recognise he is human. “We recognise that he is tired. We are proud of him.” My President, You’re Tired My President you’re tired We can see it in your eyes It’s not really something You can easily hide We see you across Our television screens Addressing the nation On a history unseen We see you stumble Over words being said And I pause to wonder What’s going on in your head Are you coping Sir With all that you face A broken nation Looking to you for grace Are you okay Mr President You look so sad Your eyes tell a story I’m sorry it’s so bad We pray for you Hold you in our thoughts This is a war We have never fought I’m glad that you’re ours That we don’t have to share That our precious nation Is under your care With our cries of faith We trusted God for a man Who could steer a nation Into unknown lands Thank you, my President For being so brave Whilst a nation is judging Each move that you’ve made We pray for you Sir We really do And we thank God For a leader like you