 Masks, hand sanitisers, temperature scans and other
hygiene protocols will be the new normal for private schools in
Pietermaritzburg and surrounds which say they are ready to reopen after getting
the green light from the Basic Education Department. Basic Education Minister Angie Motshekga said
independent schools will be under a slightly different dispensation given their
nature and size, meaning they are able to manage the social distancing
requirements more acceptably than most more crowded public schools. The National Alliance of Independent Schools
Association (Naisa) is currently negotiating a favourable dispensation for all
independent schools. Naisa chairman Mandla Mthembu said some schools
were ready to open this week. “Many schools have gone as far as buying masks and
sanitisers and putting in place teams of janitors to clean schools,” he said. Hilton independent school Cowan House Preparatory —
which had to be briefly shut for safety reasons after parents of two pupils at
the school tested positive for Covid-19 in March — said it was all set to
reopen. Cowan House Prep headmaster Derek Braans said the
school has all protocols in place. “We’ve got 13 protocols in place for all staff. We
are as ready as can be. With a small school, it will be easier to manage,”
Braans said. He said the school has worked out classroom
spacings and pupils will not be changing classes. “We have worked out different timetables. This is a
new ball game. At break time there will be no soccer balls or running around.
We’ve got a system where every pupil will be given a cone. You may not move
away from your cone and they have to be two metres apart.” Braans said the school had already implemented
guidelines for the washing of hands and sanitising. “Our experience will assist us when we start.
Pupils are used to standing in the queue and having their hands sanitised when
they get to school every morning,” he said. Wykeham Collegiate said it had already undergone
two professional deep cleans, one at the start of the holiday, and another one
recently. “We have security in place with thermal scanners
and hand sanitisers at all our entry points to ensure that every person
entering the property is sanitised, has a healthy temperature, and is wearing a
mask,” said Wykeham Collegiate principal Sue Tasker. Tasker said the school will have a nursing sister
available throughout the day and on call at night should someone not feel well
or present with any symptoms of the virus. “The school has secured a number of isolation areas
around the school in case anybody presents with a temperature and needs to be
isolated,” she added. She said when staff and pupils return, they will
undergo a briefing on protocols and each teacher will be allocated safety gear,
shields, and sanitisers for their classrooms. “Break and lunch times will be supervised by staff
to ensure social distancing is maintained at all times,” Tasker said. St Charles College principal Allen van Blerk said
the school also has all the necessary equipment and protocols in place. “Now that we have some clarity from the minister,
we are able to prepare more definite communication to our staff and parents on
the strict measures that will need to be taken to ensure that we do our part to
reduce the risk of spreading the virus,” Van Blerk said. Hilton College said it is finalising preparations
to welcome matrics back and also investigating the possibility of welcoming
Grade 11s. In a letter sent to parents on Wednesday,
headmaster George Harris said he will be communicating detailed plans over the
next few days, once the school has clarity from Naisa on how the independent
sector has been granted leave to operate. Vicky Crookes, Epworth School head of marketing,
said: “We have sourced the necessary personal protective equipment for staff and
school requirements and the campus facilities are being cleaned and sanitised. “Management continues to meet [online] bi-weekly to
mitigate all potential risks and to ensure we are in line with the Covid-19
disaster management act.” Crookes said the school will also continue with
online learning to accommodate the pupils who are not yet back at school. Murray Witherspoon, marketing manager at
Michaelhouse, said an induction programme has been developed along with the
establishment of a screening station for daily screening of all staff and
pupils upon their return. “Professional sanitisation of facilities will
complement adjustment of all work and living environments to accommodate social
distancing and regular personal sanitisation,” Witherspoon said.