Msunduzi pothole repairers say they expect to resume fixing the city’s pothole problems under alert level 3 of the lockdown. Pro-Phalt, the contractor appointed by Msunduzi last February, had to halt their operations after the announcement of the lockdown. The contractor has filled about 15 000 potholes to date, but thousands more await. “We are hoping to start in the second week of June but we’re still waiting for a go-ahead from the municipality,” Gerard Lowe, site manager of Pro-Phalt, said. He said they are waiting for Msunduzi to give them a new purchase order number. “We cannot do any work until we get a purchase order number to go ahead and continue with fixing potholes. It’s difficult to do things in good faith when legally you are not covered, and the invoice won’t get paid. Once the municipality issues us with that order number, we’ll carry on with the work. We were normally getting order numbers of between 1 000 and 1 100 square metres per month.” He said while they have started work in all the suburbs, the municipality normally issues a list of priority roads. “We basically touch in all the areas, but we don’t complete. We are given a scope of work; we don’t go out and repair potholes where we feel [like it]. They identify problem roads with a higher volume of traffic and possible accidents.” The Witness has been inundated with calls from local residents complaining about the state of the roads in Msunduzi, Howick and Hilton — the majority pulling no punches about the potholes that abound, with one resident likening them to “sinkholes” rather than potholes. Meanwhile, Howick residents are calling on authorities in uMngeni Municipality to repair a huge pothole on Main Road, outside the Methodist Church, which has been damaging tyres of their vehicles. This week, Howick councillor Janis Holmes painted a white circle around the pothole to alert motorists. Holmes said she has been trying to lobby uMngeni to fix the pothole, paint the road and install road signage for some time, to no avail. “It’s really disappointing. We have reported it and we were told that the road would be prioritised when staff are back on Monday. We were told that under level 4 technical services staff would be back at work. It should have been attended to this week before schools reopen.” Holmes said the section of the road needs maintenance due to the movement of heavy trucks. “That section of road isn’t built for the heavy loads that come on it. All the timber trucks that come out of the Karkloof area are very heavy and that road gets buckled very soon after maintenance is done.” uMngeni Municipal spokesperson Thando Mgaga said an assessment of priority pothole repairs is in place and this specific pothole has been included. “We are awaiting the commencement of level 3 so we can be able to procure the material required to repair potholes which include asphalt which we were unable to procure due to lockdown regulations as they classified some items as non-essential. The repairs will be attended to in a systematic manner utilising internal staff and external service providers,” he said.