Mayor Mzimkhulu Thebolla has opened lines of communication for Msunduzi residents to engage with him directly through several platforms, including social media. Normally residents take their concerns and suggestions to ward councillors or the call centre, but Thebolla said they should feel free to share them with him if they want to. “I work well with the councillors and I don’t want to appear as if I’m undermining them, but since I assumed this position I’ve had several members of the public wanting to communicate with me directly for various reasons.” While Msunduzi has its own official Facebook page, Thebolla has started his own, called the Office of The Mayor, Msunduzi Municipality, where all relevant correspondence will be responded to by him and his office. To kick things off, Thebolla used the hashtag #AskTheMayor as an invitation to the page’s visitors to engage with him. On Friday he launched his first month-long #SabelaUyabizwa (Heed the call) programme where he invites all citizens of Msunduzi to raise their hands on interventions, strategies, innovations, ideas and any other form of assistance they can contribute in the rebuilding of the City. “The social media campaign with a pay-off line ’How can you help’ is a citizenship-based wider call to intervene in already existing city challenges such as dirt, service delivery backlog, ageing infrastructure, corruption, poverty, unemployment, inequality etc,” read the accompanying statement. Those who want to forward their contributions can interact with Thebolla on Facebook or e-mail him directly on Mzimkhulu.Thebolla@ msunduzi.gov.za “Very soon I will be releasing a WhatsApp number where Msunduzi residents will be able to text me directly. Having all of these channels will assist in cases where I would normally get several people asking me the same question and I’d respond individually. “Through these platforms I can give a response once and everyone will be updated on the issue at the same time,” said Thebolla. When The Witness asked why these City messages weren’t being handled by the communications unit and the call centre, Thebolla said these additional platforms are there to enhance communication between Msunduzi and its residents. He said the communications unit will also assist in responding to some of the queries raised through his Facebook page. “This is another effort to create transparent governance and strengthen accountability. “The officials have also been asked to like the page so that they can see the queries or suggestions relevant to their offices because I don’t want us to just respond in texts but I want our actions to reflect what has been posted on either the Facebook page or Whats­App messages.” Thebolla understands that being on social media will be time-consuming but said he expects the communication unit to attend to matters when he is unavailable to do so. “I will give myself time at least once a day to not only respond to issues raised but also follow up on the responses given from the municipality’s side. “I know some will be tempted to abuse these platforms by posting political content so I must make myself clear that I will not be entertaining such.” “