While a lot of South Africans are rushing to get their hands on the now-famous traditional herb umhlonyane or artemisia, in the belief that it may cure and prevent Covid-19, a traditional doctor says more research is needed. Rumours that artemisia can cure the virus which has caused the pandemic broke after Madagascar’s President Andry Rajoelina announced that the herb prevents and cures the virus. However, the World Health Organisation said the supposed cure has not been tested clinically. That has not stopped people in South Africa flocking to gather and use artemisia while others are selling it on the streets. A resident of Emafakatini outside Maritzburg said a lot of people in the area were now seen in the bushes searching for the plant. “They are drinking it here and others are selling it. There’s a high demand for the plant. People are always in the bushes. We don’t know if it does cure or prevent the virus, but we are drinking it because that’s what people are saying,” she said. Though traditional doctor Dr Elliot Ndlovu, who has a farm where he grows umhlonyane in Estcourt, can’t say the herb does cure or prevent Covid-19, he said in traditional medicine it’s very useful when it comes to treating flu, asthma, sinus problems and malaria. “The artemisia is an old plant which has always been used, mostly by African people in a bid to avoid catching the flu easily. Back in the day, we used to take it at least once or twice a month so it will always be in your system and be effective against flu that might try to attack your immune system,” said Ndlovu. “But I’m really worried because people are only rushing to drink it now. It’s a bit late now because for it to work properly it needs to be taken way earlier and you need to be consistent in taking it.” Ndlovu also felt it was worth looking into the herb’s properties to see if maybe it could be a solution to the deadly virus. He also criticised the government for looking down on traditional leaders and herbs. “Covid-19 has the same symptoms as most flu, but it’s a pity that the government doesn’t involve us as traditional healers in the search for the cure for Covid-19. If you remember in 1918 during the time of influenza, a lot of people died but our forefathers survived because they were using traditional medicines,” said Ndlovu. “But our government is side-lining us. Not long ago, a certain university from Durban promised to contact me so that we can try to come up with something, but they didn’t keep their promise. “Umhlonyane does help in a lot of things and the government should be bringing us and western medicine doctors together so that we try to find if it can really cure this virus.”