Tributes have been pouring in for former Witness journalist Duma Pewa (42), who died on Friday night at his family home in Empangeni following an asthma attack. Pewa wore many hats. He was a talented photographer and over the past five years was senior manager of corporate communications at Transnet. Close friend and former colleague Nathi Oliphant recalled fond memories of Pewa. He met Pewa back in May 2004 when he joined The Witness to write and report on local government. “He had this insane laughter with which he introduced himself to the usually quiet Witness newsroom. We all looked around to see a new person perched on a previously empty desk. He was chatting on the company phone and laughing his lungs out. For a newbie, one would have expected him to assimilate with the timidity of the new employees and to observe the decorum. No, not Pewa” “Comrade Pewa was larger than life. He was a happy, good journalist and good photographer, he was affable, generous and a damn good cook ... we loved our puns and banter. He was inseparable from his Tupac rap songs and his love for everything NBA and Michael Jordan.” Another close friend and former colleague, Bheki Mbanjwa, said Duma’s signature laugh was very hard to miss and he often found himself “laughing at the way he was laughing”. It was that infectious. “As we grew closer I learned that behind that laugh was a big personality with a very big heart. Every now and then he would come to the newsroom with stacks and stacks of braai meat, enough for everyone to eat.” When Mbanjwa took up a post in 2014 at the University of Zululand, Duma arranged for him to stay at one of his family homes in Esikhawini, where Mbanjwa stayed for two years. “The bond got even stronger over the years. Whenever I took my sons to football games he would come along. He did this not only because he loved football but also to offer moral support to my youngest son, Syamthanda, the only Chiefs supporter among my children. “After one Kaizer Chiefs game at Moses Mabhida stadium, he hustled so hard to ensure that Syamthanda’s dream of getting a picture with one of the Chiefs players was realised. He patiently waited for the players outside of the stadium and begged them to take a picture with ‘his’ son — something I was not prepared to do.”