The KwaZulu-Natal government’s plan to transform the Edendale area into an economic hub with modern residential areas and an industrial zone supporting the local population is at an advanced stage. According to a document released by the provincial Human Settlements, Water and Sanitation Department, more than R100 million has already been pumped into the programme. Some of the funds, which were transferred to the Msunduzi Municipality by the department, are being used to purchase land and upgrade informal settlements within the Edendale and Vulindlela areas. The Edendale Mall, and major businesses that were recently set up in the area, form part of the Greater Edendale and Vulindlela Development Initiative (GEVDI) programme. Conceptualised in the early 2000s, the GEVDI received a major boost this month when Human Settlements Minister Lindiwe Sisulu announced the initiative was one of the housing programmes that would receive national government support. It is one of 136 programmes across the country which Sisulu has declared priority human settlements and housing development areas. “Over the next few years, we will direct our resources towards the successful roll-out of these programmes. Working together with all the stakeholders within the sector, we believe this is possible,” Sisulu said. Similar initiatives in KwaZulu-Natal include Durban’s R25 billion Cornubia development programme due to be completed in 2030. A mixed-use, mixed-income programme, Cornubia is a 200-hectare development, with 80 hectares earmarked for industrial projects and the rest for commercial, housing and other social and public facilities, including schools, crèches, clinics, multi-purpose halls, police stations and post offices. Located between Durban’s wealthier Mount Edgecombe and Umhlanga areas and disadvantaged areas north of the city, such as Inanda, Ntuzuma, KwaMashu, Phoenix, Ottawa and Waterloo, the Cornubia development programme will see more than 23 000 houses being built over the next 10 years. Close to 500 families, previously living in nearby shacks, have already moved into the modern one-bedroom and two-bedroom houses which form part of the Cornubia scheme. The provincial Human Settlements Department has already released R110 million towards the GEVDI. “The municipality already has a number of informal settlements upgrade projects in the Edendale area. “Some projects are at the planning stage and some at construction stage — there are also completed projects. “The current projects are mostly focused on upgrading settlements, together with provision of services like water and sanitation,’’ the department said. The Msunduzi Municipality, the main implementing agent of the GEVDI, has identified 17 projects which will form part of the initiative. “These developments will transform Edendale into a well-performing urban centre, through strategic and effective planning and projects linked to the ... programme,” the department said.