It was like Christmas
in May as throngs of shoppers in Pietermaritzburg flocked to local malls and
clothing shops to stock up on winter clothes and other essentials on Friday. Under Level 4
lockdown regulations, which came into effect on Friday, residents are allowed
to visit retailers to buy enough clothes to fend off the winter cold. Stores that sell
educational products and stationery were also operating as were information
technology services shops. Co-operative
Governance and Traditional Affairs Minister Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma said
retailers will also be open to allow people to buy blankets and fabric for
making cloth masks. At a large city mall,
shoppers stood in long queues outside all three entrances. The doors were
closed and guarded by security guards who only allowed a number of shoppers in
at a time, once other shoppers inside the mall had left. A manager at the Game
store at the mall said laptops, computer routers, heaters and sewing machines
were flying off the shelves. The manager, who
asked to remain unnamed as he is not authorised to speak to media, said the
store was conducting voluntary temperature checks for customers. “We have also
implemented daily temperature checks for staff as an additional measure to
support their health and safety and to continue to provide a critical service
in our community.” He said customers in
the queue were asked what items they were looking for before being allowed
inside the shop. “We are not letting
people buy items they are not supposed to. “We had people looking
for mirrors and carpets and that’s not allowed. We have a declaration form for
people who want to buy a non-essential item, but it has to be an emergency
situation.” A shopper who asked
not to be named said he had spent about 30 minutes waiting in the queue outside
the mall. “I’ve had difficulty getting some clothing items. People went crazy
buying this morning. The situation is bad but if we all calm down, we can get
through this.” Outside one of the
shops, Nicole Meyer of Chase Valley was the last person standing in line to get
inside the store. She was there to
stock up on comfortable winter clothes as she is working from home. “I didn’t anticipate
that the shops would be so busy. There’s a lot of confusion and
misunderstanding here, people think that clothes will only be allowed for
today.” Signs indicating
social distancing were placed near the cashiers, written: “Due to the Covid-19
virus, you are required to keep 1m distance between you and the next customer
as per the indicated Cross (X) on the floor.” And so, as X marked
the spot, shoppers happily waited their turn to cash up and leave. Staff working at
other shopping centres around the city also complained of having to deal with
large crowds. The CDB was also a
hive of activity as shoppers brought some life to otherwise deserted streets,
normally full from the parking areas to shops every day. While most shoppers
were wearing masks, there was little to no social distancing in queues that
were formed on Church Street, outside Truworths and Mr Price. Shoppers who arrived
outside Truworths as early as 7 am
on Friday were irked after waiting in the queue until 11 am as the shop remained closed. Sanele Madondo, who
travelled from Mpolweni, said they were told that the store would not open
until the manager arrives. “The shop assistants said they did not have any hand
sanitisers, so we have to wait for the manager.” There were also
reports of long queues for Pep and Ackermans in Howick as well.