In a “best-case scenario”, KwaZulu- Natal, could by June 1 have a cumulative total of 53 000 Covid-19 positive people (almost 10 000 with symptoms) and about 340 000 in the worst-case scenario. By November those numbers could rise to 9,3 million (best case) and 9,8 million (worst case). The province is expected to reach its peak by August with 1,1 million active cases (best case scenario) and by July in the worst-case scenario with 1,2 million active cases. By September, the province would have 14 349 people in hospital, 5 134 in ICU and more than 5 200 people dead in the best-case scenario. These projected figures are from the model on what the Covid-19 epidemic could look like in SA that was revealed on Tuesday evening by Health Minister Zweli Mkhize based on a study done by an SA Covid-19 modelling consortium. It is predicted, according to the presentation, that the country will face between 40 000 Covid-19 deaths in an optimistic scenario and 48 000 in a pessimistic one. This projected Covid-19 fatality rate will exceed the average number of deaths per year (about 30 000) from tuberculosis, SA’s current biggest killer. The modellers said their presentation was based on research gathered from the provinces since the start of Covid-19 in SA. The panel comprised doctors and professors from the Modelling and Simulation Hub, Africa (Masha), South African DSI-NRF Centre of Excellence in Epidemiological Modelling and Analysis (Sacema), Health Economics and Epidemiology Research Office (Hero), the Boston University of Public Health and the National Institute for Communicable Diseases (NICD). Masha’s Dr Sheetal Silal said there had been ongoing, extensive input from clinicians, virologists, intensivists and epidemiologists to refine key model assumptions and parameters. Hospitals will be over-filled Silal explained that from their research thus far, they had looked at the infection cases at provincial level. “The current trajectory of all the provinces, except the Western and Eastern Cape, were optimistic. The WC and EC were pessimistic at this stage,” she said. Silal said their findings showed the peak in active cases nationally was likely to be between early July (in a pessimistic scenario) and early August (in an optimistic scenario). “Under almost all scenarios, hospital and ICU capacity will be exceeded through timing and the extent is uncertain. This requires a flexible approach to recourse acquisition, with initial purchases now and additional orders as more information becomes available,” she said. Earlier, the Actuarial Society of South Africa (ASSA) had forecast that the expected cumulative death toll from Covid-19 would be “just over 48 300”. The peak of Covid-19 infections, they forecast, was only likely to be reached between August and September this year, depending on the effectiveness of lockdown and other non-pharmaceutical interventions.