The DA said on Wednesday the arrests in connection with an unlawful R255 million Free State asbestos contract are just the tip of the iceberg. DA chief whip Natasha Mazzone said the arrests were a step in the right direction. “Those who were bribed need to be brought to book. We need to see who got paid to determine who else might be involved. I think we are also just scratching the surface. “This syndicate had their finger literally in every pie. Former minister [Mosebenzi] Zwane’s admission that he was incompetent is also very worrisome. The fish rots from its head. The corruption goes to the highest of the ruling party,” she added. Blackhead Consulting CEO Edwin Sodi, who made his second appearance before the Zondo commission this week to give evidence on suspicious payments to high-profile politicians and government staff from his company, was among those arrested. Those paid included Deputy State Security Minister Zizi Kodwa, who was the ANC’s spokesperson at the time. Sodi claimed the payments were favours for friends and were not intended to secure contracts. The former head of the Free State Human Settlements Department, Nthimotse Mokhesi, also testified this week that he had received more than R600 000 from Sodi’s company. Cope spokesperson Dennis Bloem said he had hoped the arrests and further investigation would bring those involved to book. “We are happy that at least there are moves from the Zondo commission. Law enforcement agencies must get to those involved as we have always said they need to act against those who steal.” The Special Investigations Unit clarified that the arrests were the result of a year-long investigation, not as a result of this week’s testimony. Spokesperson Hlangwani Malaudzi said they waited for people to finish testifying before swooping. Wouter Wessels of the FF Plus said the Free State’s coffers had been emptied due to corruption and state capture. “We believe that it is not only officials that were involved with corrupt transactions, tender fraud and other malpractices with government funds should be punished, but also the politicians behind it. “These arrests are, however, the tip of the iceberg and much stronger action would be necessary to hold the high-ranking politicians that are behind the looting of the Free State’s funds. There are several other projects... where millions of rand were squandered,” he added. Wessels said projects like the Vrede Dairy investigation saw former officials of provincial departments prosecuted while high-ranking officials of the ANC were still free. — News24.