Athlone, Chase Valley and Mont­rose residents will finally have a chance to vote for their ward councillor next month — more than a year since the resignation of Melika Singh. The by-elections for Ward 25 will be among the seven that will be held around the province on November 11. The ward had more than 8 000 people casting their votes in the 2016 local government elections where Singh was elected as a DA councillor. Eligible voters will have an opportunity to register to vote and check their registration details at voting stations this weekend. They can go to the Full Gospel Church, All Saints United Church, Carter High School or the House of Prayer. The voting stations will open at 8 am and close at 5 pm on both Saturday and Sunday. Kate Bapela of the Independent Electoral Commission (IEC) said voters must remember to take their identity document with them — either a green barcoded ID book, a smartcard ID, or a valid temporary ID certificate. She said they would also need to complete their physical address on registration or provide sufficient particulars of their place of residence. “Voters are reminded that it is a criminal offence to register and vote in a ward in which they are not ordinarily resident,” she said. Bapela said voters, election staff and all those entering the voting station would be required to wear a mask at all times. She said those who were already registered could check their registration status online at www.elections.org.za/ieconline/ or SMS their ID number to 32810 at a cost of R1 per text message. Voters could also use these facilities to check if they are affected by the by-elections. Special voting will take place at voting stations as well as through home visits on November 10 between 8 am and 5 pm. People wishing to apply to cast a special vote can do so online or at the IEC office, at the Professor Nyembezi Centre — corner of Boshoff and Church streets during office hours between October 26 and 30. Other areas that will also be holding their by-elections on November 11 include Ward 15 in Nquthu, Port Shepstone’s Ray Nkonyeni Municipality, Ward 10 in Matubatuba and Nkandla. Philani “PG” Mavundla’s political party, the ABC, will also be looking to secure its first council seat when it contests its stronghold in Ward 7 in uMvoti’s Greytown. CUT-OFF DATES FOR THE VARIOUS ELECTORAL PROCESSES ARE: October 9: Notice calling the by-election on or before, and opening of nomination of candidates. October 15: C  ertification of voters’ roll. October 19: Cut-off date and time for submission of nomination of candidates. October 20: Notify party/independent nominator of non-compliance of outstanding candidate documents. October 23: Cut-off date and time for party/independent to submit outstanding ward candidate documents. October 23: Notices: List of and particulars pertaining to voting stations and mobile voting stations. October 26:  Compilation and certification of lists of candidates contesting a ward. October 26: Issue certificates to candidates. October 26: Opening of applications for special votes. October 30: Closing of applications for special votes. November 10: Special votes at voting stations and special vote home visits.