Former top KwaZulu-Natal cop Lieutenant-General Mmamonnye Ngobeni, (pictured) who had been reported as being on the run last week, is due to hand herself over to police on Sunday after failing to appear in the Durban Magistrate’s Court to face multimillion-rand corruption charges. She told sister paper City Press she is not in hiding. The National Prosecuting Authority’s (NPA) investigative directorate executed four warrants of arrest, including one for Ngobeni, the former provincial commissioner, who has since retired from the SA Police Service. ALSO READ: Former KZN top cop Mmamonnye Ngobeni 'at large': Hand yourself over, says NPA Controversial businessman Toshan Panday and police Colonel Navin Madhoe appeared in the Durban court on Friday in connection with corruption relating to a R47 million police tender. The duo — released on R100 000 and R10 000 bail respectively — are accused of corruption linked to tenders for accommodation for police at the 2010 Fifa World Cup. The case was enrolled almost a decade ago but, according to the NPA, “there have been hurdles because of interference and delaying tactics”. Head of the directorate advocate Hermione Cronje said: “This case is particularly important for the directorate as it turns the spotlight on how those in law enforcement entrusted with the responsibility to uphold the law were enlisted to obstruct justice.” The matter will return to court on November 11. Combined, the accused are facing 252 allegations, including fraud, forgery, corruption, and defeating and obstructing the administration of justice. Panday and Madhoe are also accused of trying to extort and bribe former KwaZulu-Natal Hawks boss, Johan Booy­sen, to drop the criminal investigation into the lucrative scam they allegedly participated in. Dismissing suggestions that she was on the run, Ngobeni told City Press: “I was phoned between 5 pm and 6 pm on Friday evening and told to present myself to the investigators on Monday.” She also mentioned the rainy conditions in Durban, to reinforce the point that she was still in the province. Ngobeni is accused of trying to stifle investigations into Panday and his cohorts, and for “accepting a gratification” from Panday, who paid for her husband’s birthday bash at the upmarket Thyme@Royal Palm restaurant in Umhlanga’s Royal Palm Hotel. Ngobeni, who is the highest profile individual on the indictment, said she was surprised to hear her name included in the charges and was only formally informed of them during the phone call on Friday afternoon. By that evening, News24 had reported the National Prosecuting Authority as saying she was “at large” and needed to turn herself in. “The reports in the media were released to deliberately mislead the public. Why would I run? I’m not a fugitive. I have ties to the community,” she said, adding that, while she had not yet seen the indictment, she was sure the charges were trumped up and that she was being “scapegoated”. Booysen, whose career was dramatically altered due to the investigations into Panday, told City Press he had “taken note of the positive developments in rooting out corruption”. “It’s been a long and arduous haul. I’m confident that, under the watch of Advocate Shamila Batohi, the national director of public prosecutions, and Hermione Cronje, head of the investigating directorate [in the office of Batohi], these cases will be seen through.” 